                                              A FAST AND ACCURATE PHYSICS-INFORMED NEURAL NETWORK REDUCED
                                                      ORDER MODEL WITH SHALLOW MASKED AUTOENCODER
                                                           YOUNGKYU KIM∗ , YOUNGSOO CHOI† , DAVID WIDEMANN‡ , AND TAREK ZOHDI∗

                                               Abstract. Traditional linear subspace reduced order models (LS-ROMs) are able to accelerate physical simulations in
                                           which the intrinsic solution space falls into a subspace with a small dimension, i.e., the solution space has a small Kolmogorov
                                           n-width. However, for physical phenomena not of this type, e.g., any advection-dominated flow phenomena such as in traffic
                                           flow, atmospheric flows, and air flow over vehicles, a low-dimensional linear subspace poorly approximates the solution. To
                                           address cases such as these, we have developed a fast and accurate physics-informed neural network ROM, namely nonlinear
                                           manifold ROM (NM-ROM), which can better approximate high-fidelity model solutions with a smaller latent space dimension
arXiv:2009.11990v2 [math.NA] 28 Sep 2020




                                           than the LS-ROMs. Our method takes advantage of the existing numerical methods that are used to solve the corresponding full
                                           order models. The efficiency is achieved by developing a hyper-reduction technique in the context of the NM-ROM. Numerical
                                           results show that neural networks can learn a more efficient latent space representation on advection-dominated data from 1D
                                           and 2D Burgers’ equations. A speedup of up to 2.6 for 1D Burgers’ and a speedup of 11.7 for 2D Burgers’ equations are achieved
                                           with an appropriate treatment of the nonlinear terms through a hyper-reduction technique. Finally, a posteriori error bounds
                                           for the NM-ROMs are derived that take account of the hyper-reduced operators.

                                              Key words. nonlinear manifold solution representation, physics-informed neural network, reduced order model, nonlinear
                                           dynamical system, hyper-reduction


                                                1. Introduction. Physical simulations are influencing developments in science, engineering, and tech-
                                           nology more rapidly than ever before. However, high-fidelity, forward physical simulations are computation-
                                           ally expensive and, thus, make intractable any decision-making applications, such as design optimization,
                                           inverse problems, optimal controls, and uncertainty quantification, for which many forward simulations are
                                           required to explore the parameter space in the outer loop.
                                                To compensate for the computational expense issue, the projection-based reduced order models (ROMs)
                                           take advantage of both the known governing equation and the data. ROMs generate the solution data from
                                           the corresponding physical simulations and then compress the data to find an intrinsic solution subspace,
                                           which is represented by a linear combination of basis vectors, i.e., LS-ROMs. This condensed solution repre-
                                           sentation is plugged back into the (semi-)discretized governing equation to reduce the number of unknowns,
                                           resulting in an over-determined system, i.e., more equations than unknowns. Note that the full governing
                                           equations are used to constrain the LS-ROM through this substitution. Therefore, this can be considered as
                                           a physics-informed surrogate model. Additionally, the existing numerical methods for the corresponding full
                                           order model (FOM) is utilized in the LS-ROM solution process. Therefore, the LS-ROM fully respects the
                                           original discretization of the governing equations that describe/approximate the underlying physical laws,
                                           unlike black-box approaches.
                                                The LS-ROM approach has been successfully applied to many problems and applications, including,
                                           but not limited to, rocket nozzle shape design [2], flutter avoidance wing shape optimization [16], topology
                                           optimization of wind turbine blades [20], porous media flow/reservoir simulations [29, 35, 74], computational
                                           electro-cardiology [73], inverse problems [28], shallow water equations [76, 66], computing electromyography
                                           [51], spatio-temporal dynamics of a predator-prey systems [23], and acoustic wave-driven microfluidic biochips
                                           [3]. A survey paper for the projection-based LS-ROM techniques can be found in [5].
                                                In spite of its successes, the linear subspace solution representation suffers from not being able to
                                           represent certain physical simulation solutions with a small basis dimension, such as advection-dominated or
                                           sharp gradient solutions. This is because LS-ROMs work only for physical problems in which the intrinsic
                                           solution space falls into a subspace with a small dimension, i.e., the solution space has a small Kolmogorov n-
                                           width. Unfortunately, even though problems that are advection-dominated or have sharp gradient solutions
                                           are important, they do not have small Kolmogorov n-width. Such physical simulations include, but are not
                                           limited to, the hyperbolic equations with high Reynolds number, the Boltzmann transport equations, and
                                           the traffic flow simulations.
                                             ∗ Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 (youngkyu kim@berkeley.edu, zohdi@berkeley.edu)
                                              † Center for Applied Scientific Computing, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94550 (choi15@llnl.gov)
                                             ‡ Computational Engineering Division,       Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,          Livermore,   CA 94550 (wide-
                                           mann1@llnl.gov)
                                                                                                          1
     Therefore, there have been many attempts to build efficient ROMs for the advection-dominated or sharp
gradient problems. The attempts can be divided mainly into two categories: the first one is to enhance the
solution representability of the linear subspace by introducing some special treatments and adaptive schemes
and the second one is to replace the linear subspace solution representation with the nonlinear manifold.
     The effort of enhancing the solution representability of the linear subspace includes the artificial viscosity,
the Petrov–Galerkin projection applied to the computational fluid dynamics problems [13, 12, 19], the residual
discrete empirical interpolation approach to handle the Navier-Stokes equations with a large Reynolds number
[72], and the space–time ROM [17, 18, 67] where the temporal as well as spatial dimensions were reduced
to maximize the compressibility even with the advection-dominated problems. A dictionary-based model
reduction method was developed in [1] where `1 minimization is used to project onto the reduced linear
subspace. A fail-safe h-adaptive algorithm was developed in [9] where the reduced linear subspace basis
vectors are broken algebraically to enrich the solution subspace. The shifted proper orthogonal decomposition
(POD) was introduced to address the issue that arises from the advection-dominated problems [60] where
a transport operator is incorporated within the POD process. The drawback with this approach is that
the speed of the transport operator must be known a priori. In a similar spirit, the transport reversal was
introduced in [61], which was inspired by the template fitting [38]. The windowed least-squares Petrov–
Galerkin model reduction for dynamical systems with implicit time integrators is introduced in [53], which
can overcome the challenges arising from the advection-dominated problems by representing only a small
time window with a local ROM. In order to capture the sharp gradient accurately, many approaches use
localization strategies. The examples of such methods include the online adaptive bases and sampling
approach in [56] and [21]. Transformed snapshot interpolation method was also developed in [70] to capture
a sharp gradient in the solution, by introducing a new transform discretization near singularities.
     Even though all the approaches mentioned above do show some remedies of overcoming the challenges
that arise from the advection-dominated problems, the solution representability of the linear subspace is still
limited in a sense that the treatments introduced in the methods above are problem-specific and require
some a priori knowledge, such as advection direction. In order to maximize the representability and make
the methodology as general as possible, it seems unavoidable to transition from the linear subspace to a
nonlinear manifold solution representation.
     There are many works available in the current literautre that looked into the nonlinear manifold solution
represenation in physical simulations. Many of them treat the weights and biases of a neural network (NN)
to be unknowns in the solution process. For example, Lagaris, et al., used a single output NN as an argument
for trial functions and minimized the partial/ordinary differential equation (PDE/ODE) residual norm [41],
where the weights of the NNs are used as optimization variables. Dissanayake and Phan-Thien used the
universal approximator of NNs as a solution representation for solving PDEs. They also used the weights
of the NNs as parameters as in the work by Lagaris, et al. [24]. A similar method was also applied to a
plasma equilibrium solver [68]. Meade and Fernandez used hard limit transfer functions for linear ordinary
differential equations [50]. However, these approaches can introduce too many unknowns because all the
wieghts and biases need to be found during the PDE/ODE solution process.
     Recently, similar attempts have been made to incorporate physical laws into NN-based surrogate models
- so called physics-informed surrogate models, where the weights and biases of the NN are determined in
the training phase. Such models include, but are not limited to, attempts to mimic temporal evolution
by incorporating a time integrator in a loss function [59, 15, 36, 47, 4] and to represent the solution with
a trained NN [59, 77, 6], the deep Galerkin method [65], approximating spatial gradient functions with a
multilayer feedforward NN [30], DeepONet [48], DeepXDE [49], fractional physics-informed NNs (fPINNs)
[52], PINNs with uncertainty quantification [75], and Deep Ritz method of minimizing the energy functional
with trial functions of NNs [69, 31]. However, inclusions of NNs in the governing equations of the underlying
physical laws, such as those above, do not take advantage of the existing numerical methods for high-fidelity
physical simulations.
     Recently, a neural network-based ROM is developed in [43], where the weights and biases are determined
in the training phase and the existing numerical methods are utilized in their models. The same technique
is extended to preserve the conserved quantities in the physical conservation laws [42]. However, their
approaches do not achieve any speed-up with respect to the corresponding FOM because the nonlinear
terms that still scale with the FOM size need to be updated every time step or Newton step.
                                                         2
      Fig. 1. The figure shows the hierarchy of several ROMs. If the governing equation is nonlinear, then a hyper-reduction is
required to achieve both accuracy and speed-up with respect to the corresponding FOM. This paper contributes to the development
of NM-LSPG-HR and NM-Galerkin-HR that achieve both speedup and accuracy with the NM-ROM. Throughout the paper, we
will compare the performance of LS-ROMs and NM-ROMs.


    Two interesting papers were written by Rim, et al., recently. First of all, manifold approximations via
transported subspaces in [62] introduced a nonlinear solution representation by explicitly composing global
transport dynamics with locally linear approximations of the solution manifolds. However, their approach is
only applicable to 1D problem for now. The other work by Rim, et al., is the depth separation for reduced
deep networks in nonlinear model reduction [63], where they applied a compression technique on weight
matrices and bias vectors to achieve the reduced deep networks.
    We present a fast and accurate physics-informed neural network ROM with a nonlinear manifold solution
representation, i.e., the nonlinear manifold ROM (NM-ROM). We train a shallow masked autoencoder with
solution data from the corresponding FOM simulations and use the decoder as the nonlinear manifold solution
representation. Our NM-ROM is different from the aformentioned physics-informed neural networks in that
we take advantage of the existing numerical methods of solving PDE/ODEs in our approach. Furthermore,
our NM-ROM is different from the neural network-based ROM of [43] in a sense that we use a shallow
masked autoencoder, while they used a deep convolutional autoencoder. The choice of the shallow masked
NN over the deep convolutional NN is determined by the efficiency of the hyper-reduction technique we have
developed.
    1.1. Nomenclature. We use the following nomenclature/abbreviation for various ROMs throughout
the paper:
      • FOM: full order model
      • LS-ROM: linear subspace reduced order model
      • LS-Galerkin: linear subspace Galerkin
      • LS-LSPG: linear subpsace least-squares Petrov–Galerkin
      • LS-Galerkin-HR: linear subspace Galerkin hyper-reduction
      • LS-LSPG-HR: linear subspace least-squares Petrov–Galerkin hyper-reduction
      • NM-ROM: nonlinear manifold reduced order model
      • NM-Galerkin: nonlinear manifold Galerkin
      • NM-LSPG: nonlinear manifold least-squares Petrov–Galerkin
      • NM-Galerkin-HR: nonlinear manifold Galerkin hyper-reduction
      • NM-LSPG-HR: nonlinear manifold least-squares Petrov–Galerkin hyper-reduction
These ROMs form a hierarchy that is depicted in Fig. 1.
     1.2. Organization of the paper. We organize the subsequent sections by starting to discuss some
background materials in Section 2, where the FOM is stated in Section 2.1 and two LS-ROMs, i.e., LS-
Galerkin and LS-LSPG, are described in Sections 2.2.2 and 2.2.3, respectively. Our NM-ROM is introduced
in Section 3, where the nonlinear manifold solution representation is explained in Section 3.1. The shallow
masked autoencoder that is used for the solution representation is described in Section 3.2. The NM-Galerkin
is explained in Section 3.3 and the NM-LSPG is descirbed in Section 3.4. The hyper-reduction technique
                                                              3
that enables the NM-ROM to achieve a speed-up is elaborated in Section 4. The error analysis is presented
in Section 5. Finally, the performance of our NM-ROM is demonstrated in two numerical experiments in
Section 6. Finally, the paper is concluded with summary and discussion in Section 7.
    2. Background.
     2.1. Full order model. A parameterized nonlinear dynamical system is considered, characterized by
a system of nonlinear ordinary differential equations (ODEs), which can be considered as a resultant system
from semi-discretization of Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) in space domains
                                         dx
(2.1)                                        = f (x, t; µ),      x(0; µ) = x0 (µ),
                                         dt
where t ∈ [0, T ] denotes time with the final time T ∈ R+ , and x(t; µ) denotes the time-dependent, pa-
rameterized state implicitly defined as the solution to problem (2.1) with x : [0, T ] × D → RNs . Further,
f : RNs × [0, T ] × D → RNs with (w, τ ; ν) 7→ f (w, τ ; ν) denotes the velocity of x, which we assume to be
nonlinear in at least its first argument. The initial state is denoted by x0 : D → RNs , and µ ∈ D denotes
parameters in the domain D ⊆ Rnµ .
     A uniform time discretization is assumed throughout the paper, characterized by time step ∆t ∈ R+
and time instances tn = tn−1 + ∆t for n ∈ N(Nt ) with t0 = 0, Nt ∈ N, and N(N ) := {1, . . . , N }. To
avoid notational clutter, we introduce the following time discretization-related notations: xn := x(tn ; µ),
x̃n := x̃(tn ; µ), x̂n := x̂(tn ; µ), and f n := f (x(tn ; µ), tn ; µ), where x̃, x̂ and x̂ are defined in Section 2.2.
     Implicit time integrators are considered as time discretization methods. To illustrate this, we mainly
consider the backward Euler time integrator for an implicit scheme. Several other time integrators are shown
in Appendix A.
     The implicit Backward Euler (BE) method numerically solves Eq. (2.1), by solving the following nonlinear
system of equations for xn at n-th time step:
(2.2)                                             xn − xn−1 = ∆tf n .
Eq. (2.2) implies the following subspace inclusion:

                                            span{f n } ⊆ span{xn−1 , xn }.
By induction, we conclude the following subspace inclusion relation:

                                     span{f 1 , . . . , f Nt } ⊆ span{x0 , . . . , xNt },
which shows that the span of nonlinear term snapshots is included in the span of solution snapshots. The
residual function with the backward Euler time integrator is defined as
(2.3)                            r nBE (xn ; xn−1 , µ) := xn − xn−1 − ∆tf n .
    2.2. Linear subspace reduced order model (LS-ROM). Many projection-based reduced order
models with linear subspace solution representation can be considered for nonlinear dynamical systems. We
consider Galerkin and least-squares Petrov-Galerkin projection methods, which are the most relevant to our
proposed method, i.e., NM-ROM.
     2.2.1. Linear subspace solution representation. The linear subspace reduced order model ap-
proach applies spatial projection using a subspace S := span{φi }ni=1
                                                                   s
                                                                      ⊆ RNs with dim(S) = ns  Ns . Using
this subspace, it approximates the solution as x ≈ x̃ ∈ xref + S (i.e., in a trial subspace) or equivalently
(2.4)                                             x ≈ x̃ = xref + Φx̂
and the time derivative of the solution as
                                             dx    dx̃       dx̂
(2.5)                                            ≈      =Φ
                                              dt    dt       dt
where xref ∈ RNs denotes a reference solution and Φ := [φ1 · · · φns ] ∈ RNs ×ns denotes a basis matrix and
x̂ ∈ Rns denotes the generalized coordinates. The initial condition for the generalized coordinate, x̂0 ∈ Rns ,
is given by x̂0 = ΦT (x0 − xref ).
     For constructing Φ, Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) is commonly used. POD [7] obtains Φ
from a truncated Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) approximation to a FOM solution snapshot matrix.
                                                              4
It is related to principal component analysis in statistical analysis [34] and
                                                                            h Karhunen–Loève expansion i[46]
                                                                                                      µn
in stochastic analysis. POD forms a solution snapshot matrix, X := xµ
                                                                    0 − xref
                                                                     1
                                                                                               ···   xNt µ − xref   ∈
 Ns ×nµ (Nt +1)          µ
R            ,           is a solution state at n-th time step with parameter µk for n ∈ N(Nt ) and
                  where xn k
k ∈ N(nµ ). Then, POD computes its thin SVD:

                                                     X = U ΣV T ,
where U ∈ RNs ×nµ (Nt +1) and V ∈ Rnµ (Nt +1)×nµ (Nt +1) are orthogonal matrices and Σ ∈ Rnµ (Nt +1)×nµ (Nt +1)
is a diagonal matrix with singular values
                                          on its diagonals. Then POD chooses the leading ns columns of
U to set Φ (i.e., Φ = u1 · · · uns , where uk is k-th column vector of U ). The POD basis minimizes
kX − ΦΦT Xk2F over all Φ ∈ RNs ×ns with q   orthonormal columns, where kAkF denotes the Frobenius norm
                   I×J
                                               PI PJ         2
of a matrix A ∈ R      , defined as kAkF =       i=1   j=1 aij with aij being an (i, j)-th element of A. Since
the objective function does not change if Φ is post-multiplied by an arbitrary ns × ns orthogonal matrix, the
POD procedure seeks the optimal ns -dimensional subspace that captures the snapshots in the least-squares
sense. For more details on POD, we refer to [33, 40].



    2.2.2. Linear subspace Galerkin projection. We derive LS-Galerkin using time continuous residual
minimization. First, we rewrite FOM ODE Eq. (2.1) as
(2.6)                          r(ẋ, x, t; µ) := ẋ − f (x, t; µ) = 0,   x(0; µ) = x0 (µ)
where r : RNs × RNs × R+ × D → RNs with (ẇ, w, τ ; ν) 7→ r(ẇ, w, τ ; ν) denotes the time continuous
                            ˙ as time derivative of (·) for notational simplicity. Replacing x with x̃ given by
residual. Here, we denote (·)
                      ˙
Eq. (2.4) and ẋ with x̃ given by Eq. (2.5) leads to the following residual function with the reduced number
of unknowns
                                       ˙ x̂, t; µ) := r(Φx̂,
                                    r̃(x̂,               ˙ xref + Φx̂, t; µ),
where r̃ : Rns × Rns × R+ × D → RNs with (ŵ,   ˙ ŵ, τ ; ν) 7→ r̃(ŵ,
                                                                    ˙ ŵ, τ ; ν) denotes the time continuous residual.
              ˙
Note that r̃(x̂, x̂, t; µ) = 0 is an over-determined system. Therefore, it is likely that no solution exists. To
close the system, we minimize the squared norm of the residual vector function:
(2.7)                                        ˙ = argminkr̃(v̂, x̂, t; µ)k2
                                             x̂                           2
                                                    v̂∈Rns

with x̂(0; µ) = x̂0 (µ) = ΦT (x0 (µ) − xref ). The solution to Eq. (2.7) leads to the LS-Galerkin
(2.8)                          ˙ = ΦT f (xref + Φx̂, t; µ), x̂(0; µ) = x̂0 (µ).
                               x̂

     Applying a time integrator to Eq. (2.8) leads to a fully discretized reduced system, denoted as the reduced
O∆E. Note that the reduced O∆E has ns unknowns and ns equations. If an implicit time integrator is
applied, a Newton–type method can be applied to solve for unknown generalized coordinates each time step.
If an explicit time integrator is applied, time marching updates will solve the system. However, we cannot
expect any speed-up because the size of the nonlinear term and its Jacobian, which need to be updated for
every Newton step, scales with the FOM size. In order to handle this issue, the hyper-reduction will be
applied (see Section 4.2.1)



    2.2.3. Linear subspace least-squares Petrov–Galerkin projection. The Least-Squares Petrov–
Galerkin (LSPG) method projects a fully discretized solution space onto a trial subspace. That is, it
discretizes Eq. (2.1) in time domain and replaces xn with x̃n := xref + Φx̂n for n ∈ N(Nt ) in residual
functions defined in Section 2.1 and Appendix A. Here, we consider only implicit time integrators because
the LSPG projection is equivalent to the Galerkin projection when an explicit time integrator is used as
shown in Section 5.1 in [10]. The residual functions for implicit time integrators are defined in (2.3), (A.1),
and (A.2) for various time integrators. For example, the residual function with the backward Euler time
                                                             5
integrator1 after the trial subspace projection becomes
                        r̃nBE (x̂n ; x̂n−1 , µ) := r nBE (xref + Φx̂n ; xref + Φx̂n−1 , µ)
(2.9)
                                                = Φ(x̂n − x̂n−1 ) − ∆tf (xref + Φx̂n , tn ; µ).
The basis matrix Φ can be found by the POD as in the Galerkin approach. Note that Eq. (2.9) is an
over-determined system. To close the system and solve for the unknown generalized coordinates, x̂n , the
LSPG takes the squared norm of the residual vector function and minimize it at every time step:
                                                   1 n                   2
(2.10)                              x̂n = argmin     kr̃ (v̂; x̂n−1 , µ)k2 .
                                               n
                                           v̂∈R s  2 BE
The Gauss–Newton method with the starting point x̂n−1 is applied to solve the minimization problem (2.10)
in LSPG. However, as in the Galerkin approach, a hyper-reduction, which will be discussed in Section 4.2.2,
is required for a speed-up due to the presence of the nonlinear residual vector function that scales with the
full order model size.
    3. Nonlinear manifold reduced order model (NM-ROM). A projection-based reduced order
model with nonlinear manifold solution representation is introduced in this section. The ROM formulation
with nonlinear manifold solution representation is introduced in Section 3.1. Section 3.2 describes how we
construct the neural network that is used as a nonlinear manifold solution representation. As in the LS-
ROMs of Section 2.2, Galerkin and least-squares Petrov–Galerkin projections will be applied in Sections 3.3
and 3.4. Finally, the hyper-reduction for the NM-ROM is described in Section 4.
    3.1. Nonlinear manifold solution representation. The NM-ROM applies solution representation
using a nonlinear manifold S := {g (v̂) |v̂ ∈ Rns }, where g : Rns → RNs with ns  Ns denotes a nonlinear
function that maps a latent space of dimension ns to the full order model space of dimension, Ns . That is,
the NM-ROM approximates the solution in a trial manifold as
(3.1)                                             x ≈ x̃ = xref + g (x̂)
and the time derivative of the solution as
                                             dx    dx̃            dx̂
(3.2)                                           ≈      = J g (x̂)
                                             dt    dt             dt
where x̂ ∈ Rns denotes the generalized coordinates. The initial condition for the generalized coordinate,
x̂0 ∈ Rns , is given by x̂0 = h (x0 − xref ), where h ≈ g −1 (i.e., x − xref ≈ g (h (x − xref ))). The details
about the nonlinear functions, h and g, are presented in Section 3.2.
      3.2. Shallow masked autoencoder. In this section, we present the approach for constructing a
nonlinear manifold. Here, we use an autoencoder, A, in the form of a feedforward neural network, that is
trained to reconstruct its input. The autoencoder architecture is composed of an encoder, E and a decoder,
D. The encoder maps a high dimensional input, x ∈ RNs to a low-dimensional latent vector, x̂ ∈ Rns ,
i.e., E(x) = x̂, and the decoder then maps the latent vector to x̃ ∈ RNs , i.e., D(x̂) = x̃, where ns  Ns .
Therefore, we have

                                              x ≈ x̃ = A(x) = D(E(x)).
    The main idea behind an autoencoder is that it forces the model to learn salient features by compressing
the input into a low-dimensional space and then reconstructing the input.
    The universal approximation theorem [22, 57], proves that functions of the form,
                                  N2         N1
                                                             !
                                 X          X
(3.3)                      vk =      wjk2 σ     wij1 ui + θj    for k ∈ N(N3 ),
                                      j=1           i=1
where wij1 , wjk2 ∈ R are weights, θj ∈ R is a bias, σ is a non-polynomial activation function, ui is an input
and vk is an output, can approximate any continuous, real-valued function arbitrarily well. Eq. (3.3) is a
simple, single hidden layer neural network with a non-polynomial activation function. Its input dimension
is N1 , width of the hidden layer is N2 , and output dimension is N3 . We construct two single hidden layer
    1 Although the backward Euler time integrator is used extensively in the paper for illustrative purposes, many other time

integrators introduced in Appendix A can be applied to all the ROM methods dealt in the paper in a straight forward way.
                                                             6
     Fig. 2. General description of an autoencoder: x being encoded to a latent vector, x̂, by the encoder and decoded by the
decoder, to x̃. The mean square error between x and x̃ is minimized to update neural network weights and bias.




neural networks, one is the encoder, E, and the other is the decoder, D. For non-polynomial activation
functions, a sigmoidal function given by
                                                                 1
                                                  σ(x) =
                                                           1 + exp (−x)
or a swish function given by
                                                          x
                                                  σ(x) =
                                                    1 + exp (−x)
are used. We use a non-deep neural network for the decoder because the decoder and its Jacobian are
computed many times during the ROM computation. In order for this computation to be on par with POD
methods, it is necessary to limit the depth of the decoder network. The dimension of the encoder input and
the decoder output is Ns and the dimension of the encoder E output and the decoder D input is ns . The
width of the encoder E and decoder D are hyper-parameters. The first layers of the encoder E and decoder
D are fully-connected layers, where the nonlinear activation functions are applied and the last layer of the
encoder E is fully-connected layer with no activation functions. The last layer of the decoder D is either
fully-connected layer or sparsely-connected layer with no activation functions. These network architectures
are shown in Fig. 3.
    Then, combining the encoder and the decoder yields the autoencoder which can be trained to learn the
identity mapping in an unsupervised manner because the desired output is the input. During the training
phase, the error measured by
                                                       kX − X̃k2F ,
where X is solution snapshot matrix and X̃ is a reconstructed solution snapshot matrix, is minimized by
optimizing learnable parameters (i.e., weights and bias) in the two networks. The error is back-propagated
through the networks and the gradient with respect to the learnable parameters are computed by using the
chain rule [64, 54, 71]. Then, the parameters are updated in the steepest descent direction with respect to
the gradient. Here, ADAM [37], a variant of stochastic gradient descent (SGD), is used to approximate the
gradient with a few data samples to make training process faster. Stochastic gradient noise helps the neural
network avoiding over-fitting [8]. Furthermore, graphics processing units (GPUs) are utilized to parallelize
the autonencoder’s training by simultaneously approximating multiple snapshots [58]. In practice, a dataset
is usually normalized before the training process. Here, we normalize the dataset (i.e., solution snapshots)
                                                             7
                      (a) Without masking                                          (b) With masking

     Fig. 3. Three layer autoencoder architecture: (a) unmasked and (b) masked shallow neural neural network. Nodes and
edges in orange color represent active path that stems from the sampled outputs that are marked as the orange disks. Note that
the masked shallow neural network has a sparser structure than the unmasked one.



in the following way:

                                             xnormal = xscale       (x − xref )
where x is a column vector of the dataset matrix X and       denotes the element-wise product. xscale and
xref are directly computed from the dataset along each feature direction such that xnormal ranges either
[−1, 1] or [0, 1].
    After data normalization, an autoencoder can be trained to learn the identity mapping with the normal-
ized dataset. Now, a normalized encoder maps from a high dimensional normalized input xnormal ∈ RNs to
a low dimensional latent vector x̂ ∈ Rns in the form:

                                                    x̂ = en (xnormal )
and a normalized decoder maps from the low dimensional latent vector x̂ ∈ Rns to a reconstructed normalized
input x̃normal ∈ RNs in the form:

                                                    x̃normal = de (x̂) .
Next, the encoder E and the decoder D can be written by
                                            E (x) = en (xscale      (x − xref ))
                                            D (x̂) = xref + de (x̂)      xscale
where and denote the element-wise product and division, respectively. Moreover, the row-wise product
of xscale and the first layer weight matrix of en yields the scaled encoder h. Likewise, the row-wise division
of xscale and the last layer weight matrix of de gives us the scaled decoder g. Finally, the encoder E and
the decoder D are given by
                                                  E (x) = h (x − xref )
                                                 D (x̂) = xref + g (x̂) .
We set the decoder D (x̂) = xref + g (x̂) as the nonlinear manifold solution representation discussed in
Section 3.
    The scaled decoder g can be written in the form
                                               g (x̂) = W 2 σ (W 1 x̂ + b1 )
                                                              8
where W 1 and W 2 are weight matrices, b1 is a bias vector, and σ is an element-wise activation function. The
decoder can have more than two hidden layers (i.e., deep network). However, we use the single layer decoder
(i.e., shallow network) because the Jacobian computation of the multiple hidden layer decoder involves
multiple matrix-matrix multiplications. The output layer of the decoder g is fully-connected as depicted in
Fig. 3 (a) (i.e., W 2 is a dense matrix), which means all nodes in the previous layer are required to compute
even one element of the output vector. We apply a sparsity mask on the output layer of the decoder. Then,
sampling a subset of the output vector doesn’t need all nodes in the previous layer as depicted in Fig. 3 (b).
Thus, more speed-up can be achieved by a hyper-reduction technique that is described in Section 4. For
example, the orange color nodes in Fig. 3 show the required nodes when the first and the last elements of
the output are selected, which are represented as solid orange disks. To create a sparsely connected layer,
we use a mask matrix S which contains either zero or one as shown in Fig. 4. By element-wise product
S W 2 , a sparse weight matrix is obtained. The mask matrix S is constructed to reflect local connectivity
as in the Laplacian operator approximated by the central difference scheme in Finite Difference Method.
The autoencoder composed of the encoder and the sparse decoder is trained by using custom pruning in
PyTorch [55] pruning module.




              (a) Mask matrix for 1D Burgers equation            (b) Mask matrix for 2D Burgers equation

    Fig. 4. Mask matrix. Note that the mask matrices have the analogical structure to the ones of Mass matrix that arises
from a numerical discretization, such as the finite element or difference method, with 1D or 2D diffusion equations.

     In the autoencoder, the number of learnable parameters (i.e., weights and bias) is determined by the
number of nodes in the hidden layers in the encoder and the decoder, dimension of latent vector, and the
sparsity in the mask matrix. The sparsity is determined by how many nodes in the hidden layer are used
to compute one element of the output and how many nodes in the hidden layer are shared for neighboring
elements of the output. To generate a mask matrix for 1D problem, we use two variables b and δb, where
b denotes the number of nodes in the hidden layer to compute one output element (width of the block in
each row in Fig. 4(a)) and δb denotes the amount by which the block shifts. For example, at the ith row,
j ∈ {(i − 1)db, (i − 1)db + 1, · · · , (i − 1)db + b}th column is one and the others are zero. For a mask of the 2D
problem, we create a building matrix in the same way as the mask matrix for 1D problem. Then, we add
all rows neighboring ith row (e.g., 5-point stencil for 2D and 7-point stencil for 3D) to ith row and change
nonzero values to one. Note that the mask matrix for 2D problem as in Fig. 4(b) looks similar to 2D finite
difference Laplacian operator.
     There is no way to determine these hyper-parameters a priori. If the number of learnable parameters
is not enough, the decoder is not able to represent the nonlinear manifold well. On the other hand, too
many learnable parameters may result in over-fitting, so the decoder is not able to generalize well, which
means the trained decoder can’t be used for problems whose data is unseen, i.e., the predictive case. To
avoid over-fitting, there are two options to consider. In the first option, one first divides the data into two
sets, i.e., train and test sets. Then, the autoencoder is trained using the train set only and is tested for
the generalization ability using the test set. If the mean squared error on the test and train sets are very
different, the over-fitting occurs and we should reduce the number of learnable parameters [39].
     The second option of avoiding the overfitting is to use Akaike’s information criteria (AIC) which is given
by
                                                                    Nw
                                                    AIC = ln(e) + 2
                                                                    N
            kX−X̃k2
where e =     2N
                  F
                    , Nw is the total number of learnable parameters, and N is the number of elements in
the data set matrix (i.e., X). If one minimizes only the first term of AIC, then an over-fit network will be
                                                           9
obtained. On the other hand, if one minimizes only the second term of AIC, i.e., Nw = 0, then the network
will not fit the training distribution. Therefore, the minimum of AIC helps train a model that is not over-fit
and generalizes well. [45, 39]. However, finding the minimum of AIC requires a lot more training processes
than the first option above. Because of randomness in training, e.g., the random initialization of weights and
bias in neural networks and SGD optimization method, e will be different for every training process even
with the same Nw and the dataset matrix. Therefore, AIC needs to be averaged over several training for
each Nw to find the minimum of AIC.
     Because of the practicality of the first option of avoiding the overfitting over the second option, we use
the first option in our numerical experiments. For example, as shown in Fig. 5, the mean squares error on
the test and train data sets are very close. This implies that the trained autoencoder is not over-fit.


     100                                         100                                         100




                                                10-5                                        10-5
    10-5
           0      500        1000                      0        1000    2000                       0      1000        2000

       (a) 1D Burgers equation                    (b) 2D Burgers equation, u                  (c) 2D Burgers equation, v


     Fig. 5. Loss history of decoders for various problems; all three figures show good agreement between train and test loss
history, which is a sign for good balance between overfitting and accuracy.


    3.3. Nonlinear manifold Galerkin projection. We derive NM-Galerkin using time continuous resid-
ual minimization. Replacing x with x̃ given by Eq. (3.1) and ẋ with x̃    ˙ given by Eq. (3.2) in Eq. (2.6) leads
to the following residual function with the reduced number of unknowns
(3.4)                               ˙ x̂, t; µ) := r(J g (x̂)x̂,
                                 r̃(x̂,                      ˙ xref + g(x̂), t; µ).
Note that Eq. (3.4) is an over-determined system. Therefore, it is likely that no solution exists. To close the
system, we minimize the squared norm of the residual vector function:
(3.5)                                    ˙ = argminkr̃(v̂, x̂, t; µ)k2
                                         x̂                                 2
                                                       v̂∈Rns
with x̂(0; µ) = x̂0 (µ) = h (x0 (µ) − xref ). The solution to Eq. (3.5) leads to the NM-Galerkin
(3.6)                         ˙ = J g (x̂)† f (xref + g(x̂), t; µ), x̂(0; µ) = x̂0 (µ)
                              x̂
where the Moore–Penrose inverse of a matrix A ∈ RNs ×ns with full column rank is defined as A† :=
(AT A)−1 AT .
     Applying a time integrator to Eq. (3.6) leads to a fully discretized reduced system, denoted as the
reduced O∆E. Note that the reduced O∆E has ns unknowns and ns equations. If an implicit time integrator
is applied, a Newton–type method can be applied to solve for unknown generalized coordinates each time
step. If an explicit time integrator is applied, time marching updates will solve the system. However, we
cannot expect any speed-up because the size of the nonlinear terms and their Jacobians, which need to be
updated for every Newton step, scales with the FOM size. In order to handle this issue, the hyper-reduction
will be applied (see Section 4.3.1).
     3.4. Nonlinear manifold least-squares Petrov–Galerkin projection. Alternatively, the nonlinear
manifold least-squares Petrov–Galerkin (NM-LSPG) approach projects a fully discretized solution space onto
a trial manifold. That is, it discretizes Eq. (2.1) in time domain and replaces xn with x̃n := xref + g (x̂n )
for n ∈ N(Nt ) in residual functions defined in Section 2.1 and Appendix A. Here, we consider only implicit
time integrators for simplicity. See Ref. [44] for other types of time integrators. The residual functions for
several implicit time integrators are defined in (2.3), (A.1), and (A.2). For example, the residual function
                                                                10
with the backward Euler time integrator1 after the trial manifold projection becomes
                     r̃nBE (x̂n ; x̂n−1 , µ) := r nBE (xref + g (x̂n ) ; xref + g (x̂n−1 ) , µ)
(3.7)
                                             = g (x̂n ) − g (x̂n−1 ) − ∆tf (xref + g (x̂n ) , tn ; µ).
The nonlinear manifold g can be found by training the autoencoder as described in Section 3.2. Note that
Eq. (3.7) is an over-determined system. Therefore, it is likely that no solution exists. To close the system
and solve for the unknown generalized coordinates, x̂n , the NM-LSPG takes the squared norm of the residual
vector function and minimizes it at every time step:
                                                            1 n                     2
(3.8)                                     x̂n = argmin        kr̃BE (v̂; x̂n−1 , µ)k2 .
                                                 v̂∈R sn    2
The Gauss–Newton method with the starting point x̂n−1 is applied to solve the minimization problem (3.8).
However, as in the Galerkin approach, a hyper-reduction which will be discussed in Section 4.3.2 is required
for a speed-up due to the presence of the nonlinear residual vector function that scales with the full order
model size. More specifically, g (x̂n ), f (xref + g (x̂n ) , t; µ), and their Jacobians are needed to be updated
whenever x̂n chagnes if the backward Euler time integrator is used.
     4. Hyper-reduction. As mentioned in Section 2.2 and 3, we cannot expect speed-up even though the
dimension of unknowns in ROMs is small, i.e., ns  Ns , because the nonlinear term still scales with the
full order model size. To overcome this issue, there are several hyper-reduction techniques available, e.g.,
[14, 25, 26, 13, 19] for LS-ROMs. These hyper-reduction techniques share a common feature and it plays an
important role in the development of the hyper-reduction technique in the NM-ROMs, so we will go over
one of the hyper-reduction technique that is commonly used in the LS-ROMs.
    4.1. Nonlinear residual approximation. We follow the DEIM-SNS and GNAT-SNS approaches
introduced in [19] where the solution snapshots, whose span includes a span of nonlinear term snapshots,
are taken to build a nonlinear term basis. Then, it selects a subset of each nonlinear term basis vector to
either interpolate or data-fit in a least-squares sense. In this way, it reduces the computational complexity
of updating nonlinear terms in an iterative solver for nonlinear problems.
    In more details, the GNAT-SNS method approximates the nonlinear residual term with gappy POD [27]
as
(4.1)                                              r̃ ≈ Φr r̂,
                                    Ns ×nr
where Φr := [φr,1 , . . . , φr,nr ] ∈ R      , ns ≤ nr  Ns , denotes the residual basis matrix and r̂ ∈ Rnr
denotes the generalized coordinates of the nonlinear residual term. Here, r̃ represents a residual vector
function, e.g., the backward Euler residual, r̃nBE , defined in Eq. (2.9). The GNAT-SNS method uses the SVD
of the FOM solution snapshot matrix to construct Φr , which reduces computational cost by avoiding another
POD to a nonlinear residual term snapshots. The hyper-reduction method solves the following least-squares
problem to obtain the generalized coordinates r̂:
                                                        1                  2
(4.2)                                   r̂ := argmin       Z T (r̃ − Φr v̂) .
                                               v̂∈Rnr   2                  2

where Z T := [ep1 , . . . , epnz ]T ∈ Rnz ×Ns , ns ≤ nr ≤ nz  Ns , is the sampling matrix and epi is the pi th
column of the identity matrix I Ns ∈ RNs ×Ns . The solution to Eq. (4.2) is given as

                                              r̂ = (Z T Φr )† Z T r̃,
where the Moore–Penrose inverse of a matrix A ∈ Rnz ×nr with full column rank is defined as A† :=
(AT A)−1 AT . Therefore, Eq. (4.1) becomes
(4.3)                                        r̃ ≈ Pr̃,
where P := Φr (Z T Φr )† Z T is the oblique projection matrix. The projection matrix has a pseudo-inverse
instead of the inverse because it allows the oversampling, i.e., nr < nz . The hyper-reduction method does not
construct the sampling matrix Z. Instead, it maintains the sampling indices {p1 , . . . , pnf } and corresponding
rows of Φr and r̃. This enables hyper-reduced ROMs to achieve a speed-up when it is applied to nonlinear
problems.
    The sampling indices (i.e., Z) can be determined by Algorithm 3 of [13] for computational fluid dynamics
                                                        11
problems and Algorithm 5 of [11] for other problems. These two algorithms take greedy procedure to
minimize the error in the gappy reconstruction of the POD basis vectors Φr . These sampling algorithms for
the hyper-reduction method allows oversampling (i.e., nz > nr ), resulting in solving least-squares problems
in the greedy procedure. These selection algorithms can be viewed as the extension of Algorithm 1 in [14]
(i.e., a row pivoted LU decomposition) to the oversampling case. The nonlinear residual term projection
error associated with these sampling algorithms is presented in Appendix D of [13]. That is,

                                        kr̃ − Pr̃k2 ≤ kR−1 k2 kr̃ − Φr ΦTr r̃k2
where R is the triangular factor from the QR factorization of Z T Φr (i.e., Z T Φr = QR). For more details,
please refer to [19]2 .
    4.2. Hyper-reduction for LS-ROM. We present formulations of LS-Galerkin-HR and LS-LSPG-HR.
For numerical examples, LS-LSPG-HR is only implemented.
    4.2.1. LS-Galerkin-HR. We denote the hyper-reduced linear subspace Galerkin as LS-Galerkin-HR.
The LS-Galerkin-HR method approximates the nonlinear residual term with the gappy POD procedure as
in Section 4.1. Therefore, the LS-Galerkin-HR method replaces the residual in (2.7) with Pr̃(v̂, x̂, t; µ) given
by Eq. (4.3). Thus, it minimizes the following least-squares problem:
(4.4)                              ˙ = argmink(Z T Φr )† Z T r̃(v̂, x̂, t; µ)k2
                                   x̂                                             2
                                            v̂∈Rns
with x̂(0; µ) = x̂0 (µ). The solution to Eq. (4.4) leads to the following reduced ODE:
(4.5) x̂˙ = ((Z T Φr )† Z T Φ)† ((Z T Φr )T Z T Φr )−1 (Z T Φr )T Z T f (xref + Φx̂, t; µ), x̂(0; µ) = x̂0 (µ).
     Applying a time integrator to Eq. (4.5) leads to a fully discretized reduced system, denoted as the
reduced O∆E. Note that the reduced O∆E has ns unknowns and ns equations. If an implicit time integrator
is applied, a Newton–type method can be applied to solve for unknown generalized coordinates each time
step. If an explicit time integrator is applied, time marching updates can be applied.
     Note that the operator ((Z T Φr )† Z T Φ)† ((Z T Φr )T Z T Φr )−1 (Z T Φr )T can be pre-computed once for all.
We avoid constructing the sampling matrix Z. For example, the operator Z T Φr can be computed simply
by extracting only the selected rows of Φr . For the term, Z T f , only the nonlinear term elements that are
selected by the sampling matrix need to be computed. This implies that we have to keep track of the rows
of Φ that are needed to compute the selected nonlinear term elements, which is usually a larger set than the
rows that are selected solely by the sampling matrix, i.e., Z T Φ, as in the 5-point stencil or 7-point stencil
in the finite difference method.
   4.2.2. LS-LSPG-HR. We denote the hyper-reduced linear subspace LSPG as LS-LSPG-HR. The LS-
LSPG-HR method approximates the nonlinear residual term with the gappy POD procedure as in Section 4.1.
Therefore, the LS-LSPG-HR method replaces the residual in (2.10) with Pr̃(v̂, x̂, t; µ) given by Eq. (4.3).
Thus, it minimizes the following least-squares problem:
                                            1                                       2
                             x̂n = argmin       (Z T Φr )† Z T r̃nBE (v̂; x̂n−1 , µ) ,
                                    v̂∈Rns  2                                       2

with x̂(0; µ) = x̂0 (µ). Note that the pseudo-inverse (Z T Φr )† can be pre-computed once for all. Due
to the definition of r̃nBE in Eq. (2.9), the sampling matrix Z needs to be applied to the following terms:
Φ(x̂n − x̂n−1 ) and f (xref + Φx̂n , t; µ) at every time step. The first term Z T Φ can be precomputed by
extracting the selected rows of the basis matrix. For the second term, only the nonlinear term elements that
are selected by the sampling matrix need to be computed. This implies that we have to keep track of the
rows of Φ that are needed to compute the selected nonlinear term elements, which is usually a larger set
than the rows that are selected solely by the sampling matrix, i.e., Z T Φ, as in the 5-point stencil or 7-point
stencil in the finite difference method.
     4.3. Hyper-reduction for NM-ROM. There are two layers of nonlinear terms in the NM-ROM:
(i) the nonlinear term in the original governing equations, i.e., f in Eq. (2.1), and (ii) the decoder, which

  2 In this paper, GNAT-SNS in [19] is re-named as LS-LSPG-HR to emphasize the difference between the LS-ROMs and

NM-ROMs.
                                                          12
is nonlinear function of the generalized coordinates, i.e., g in Eq. (3.1) and appears in the definition of
residuals both for Galerkin and Petrov–Galerkin cases. The first layer nonlinear term can be treated in the
same way as the LS-ROMs (see Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2). Now, it is the second layer nonlinear term that
requires a special attention. For example, the Jacobian of the decoder needs to be evaluated at every solver
iteration. Because the cost of computing the Jacobian scales with the number of learnable parameters in
the decoder, we cannot expect much speed-up. As we did in the hyper-reduction process of the LS-ROMs,
we have to avoid computing all the entries of the decoder or its Jacobian because they scale with the full
order model size. This will be achieved by constructing a subnet that computes only the relevant outputs,
which is discussed in Section 4.4. First, we state the hyper-reduced NM-ROMs, i.e., the NM-Galerkin-HR in
Section 4.3.1 and the NM-LSPG-HR in Section 4.3.2. At last, the flop count estimate comparison between
non-hyper-reduced and hyper-reduced models are shown at the end of Section 4.4 and their derivations are
shown in Appendix B.

    4.3.1. NM-Galerkin-HR. Now, we apply the hyper-reduction to the NM-Galerkin method. We de-
note the hyper-reduced nonlinear manifold Galerkin as NM-Galerkin-HR. The NM-Galerkin-HR method
approximates the nonlinear residual term with the gappy POD procedure as in Section 4.1. Therefore,
the NM-Galerkin-HR method replaces the residual in (3.5) with Pr̃(v̂, x̂, t; µ) given by Eq. (4.3). Thus, it
minimizes the following least-squares problem:
(4.6)                              ˙ = argmink(Z T Φr )† Z T r̃(v̂, x̂, t; µ)k2
                                  x̂                                             2
                                             v̂∈Rns
with x̂(0; µ) = x̂0 (µ). The solution to Eq. (4.6) leads to the NM-Galerkin-HR
(4.7)           ˙ = ((Z T Φr )† Z T J g (x̂))† (Z T Φr )† Z T f (xref + g(x̂), t; µ), x̂(0; µ) = x̂0 (µ).
               x̂
    Applying a time integrator to Eq. (4.7) leads to a fully discretized reduced system, denoted as the
reduced O∆E. Note that the reduced O∆E has ns unknowns and ns equations. If an implicit time integrator
is applied, a Newton–type method can be applied to solve for unknown generalized coordinates each time
step. If an explicit time integrator is applied, time marching updates will solve the system.
    Note that the pseudo inverse, (Z T Φr )† , can be pre-computed once for all by extracting only the selected
rows of Φr . However, the term, Z T J g (x̂), cannot be precomputed because J g needs to be updated every
time x̂ is updated. Fortunately, we need to compute only the selected rows of J g by the sampling matrix
Z. Similarly, for the term, Z T f , only the nonlinear term elements that are selected by the sampling matrix
need to be computed. This implies that we have to keep track of the outputs of g that are needed to compute
the selected nonlinear term elements, which is usually a larger set than the outputs that are selected solely
by the sampling matrix, i.e., Z T g, as in the 5-point stencil or 7-point stencil in the finite difference method.

     4.3.2. NM-LSPG-HR. We apply the hyper-reduction to the NM-LSPG method discussed in Section
3.4. The hyper-reduction procedure for the nonlinear residual function after the trial manifold projection is
the same as the one in Section 4.1, i.e., we replace the residual defined in (3.7) with Pr̃nBE and plug it into
the minimization problem in Eq. (3.8). Then, the minimization problem becomes
                                             1                                       2
                            x̂n = argmin         (Z T Φr )† Z T r̃nBE (v̂; x̂n−1 , µ) .
                                   v̂∈Rns    2                                       2

Note that the pseudo-inverse (Z T Φr )† can be pre-computed once for all. Due to the definition of r̃nBE
in Eq. (3.7), the sampling matrix Z needs to be applied the following two terms: g (x̂n ) − g (x̂n−1 ) and
f (xref + g (x̂n ) , t; µ) at every time step. The first term, Z T (g (x̂n ) − g (x̂n−1 )), requires to compute only
the selected outputs of the decoder. Furthermore, for the second term, only the nonlinear term elements
that are selected by the sampling matrix need to be computed. This implies that we have to keep track of
the outputs of g that are needed to compute the selected nonlinear term elements by the sampling matrix,
which is usually a larger set than the outputs that are selected solely by the sampling matrix, i.e., Z T g, as
in the 5-point stencil or 7-point stencil in the finite difference method. Therefore, we build a subnet that
computes only the outputs of the decoder that is required to compute the elements of the nonlinear term, f .
Then, with the same subnet, the outputs required for the first term, Z T (g (x̂n ) − g (x̂n−1 )), can be extracted
from the same subnet. The construction of the subnet is explained in Section 4.4.1.

                                                           13
     4.4. Efficient Hyper-Reduction Decoder Computation. In the NM-LSPG-HR method, the resid-
ual is evaluated at the sampling points given by the hyper-reduction. We use “sample points” and “hyper-
reduction indices” interchangeably throughout the paper. Evaluating the decoder and its Jacobian can be
done efficiently by restricting the computation to the active paths of the outputs required to compute the
selected residual elements. For example, active paths of the sparse decoder are shown in orange color in
Fig. 3(b). The costs of computing the decoder and its Jacobian scale piecewise-linearly with the number
of sample points because the slopes of the costs of computing the decoder and its Jacobian vs the number
of sample points are different depending on how many nodes in hidden layer are shared for each sample
point (see Fig. 6). The distribution of the hyper-reduction indices determines the number of overlapping
nodes in hidden layer of decoder. The more the overlapping nodes in hidden layer implies the more efficient
computation of the hyper-reduced decoder. If successive points are selected, overlapping of nodes in hidden
layer are maximized. If the selected points are uniformly apart, then the overlapping of nodes in hidden layer
is minimized. In the case of random distribution, if the number of selected points is small, the possibility of
overlapping is low. Our required outputs to compute the selected residual elements after the hyper-reduction
are neither successive nor uniformly separated. Thus, the cost of computing the decoder and its Jacobian
would be between case 1 (successive points) and case 2 (uniformly separated points) in Fig. 6. By restricting
our computation to active paths, we only compute along the subnet of the decoder network that is needed
for our required outputs.


                                       10-3
                            2.5

                               2

                            1.5

                               1

                            0.5

                               0
                                   0          100            200             300        400


    Fig. 6. Illustration of the computational time elapsed for the evaluation of decoder and its Jacobian vs the number of
sample points from 2D Burgers’ equation in Section 6.2. The total number of points is 3364.




    4.4.1. Construction of a subnet. To determine the sparse decoder’s active paths for given hyper-
reduction indices together with additional indices required to compute the hyper-reduced residual (i.e., the
neighbor indices that are used to approximate the derivatives at the sample point), denoted as H, we follow
the steps below:
Step 1: Set nonlinear activation functions to be identity functions.
Step 2: Replace nonzero elements of the weight matrices, W 1 , W 2 S and the bias vector, b1 with one
        and then denote each of them as W̃ 1 , W̃ 2 , and b̃1 , respectively. Zero elements of W̃ 1 , W̃ 2 , and b̃1
        represent non-connected edges between layers.
Step 3: A new decoder model, g̃(y 0 ), is created in the form
                                                    g̃(y 0 ) = W̃ 2 (W̃ 1 y 0 + b̃1 )
                                                             14
        or for each layer, we can write
                                                      y 1 = W̃ 1 y 0 + b̃1
                                                      y 2 = W̃ 2 y 1 .
                             T      ns
Step 4: Set y 0 = (1, · · · , 1) ∈ R as an input. By construction, g̃(y 0 ) must be all positive.
Step 5: Define the target vector as y ∗ = y 2 − e ∈ RNs , where ith component of the error vector, e, is defined
        as ei = δij , j ∈ H. Then the loss function, L, is defined as
                                                         1
                                                    L = ky 2 − y ∗ k22
                                                         2
              ∂L
        and ∂y   is given by
                2

                                                   ∂L
                                                        = y 2 − y ∗ = e.
                                                   ∂y 2
Step 6: Compute ∇W̃ 2 L, ∇W̃ 1 L, and ∇b̃1 L using the chain rule
                                                                  
                                ∂L      ∂L ∂y 2            ∂L T
                  ∇W̃ 2 L =          =               =         y1      s(W̃ 2 )
                              ∂ W̃ 2   ∂y 2 ∂ W̃ 2        ∂y 2
                                                                                          
                                ∂L      ∂L ∂y 1          ∂L ∂y 2 ∂y 1            T ∂L T
                  ∇W̃ 1 L =          =               =                   = W̃ 2        y0        s(W̃ 1 )
                              ∂ W̃ 1   ∂y 1 ∂ W̃ 1      ∂y 2 ∂y 1 ∂ W̃ 1           ∂y
                                                                                   2
                               ∂L     ∂L ∂y 1        ∂L ∂y 2 ∂y 1          T ∂L
                    ∇b̃1 L =        =             =                  = W̃ 2            s(b̃1 )
                              ∂ b̃1   ∂y 1 ∂ b̃1     ∂y 2 ∂y 1 ∂ b̃1          ∂y 2
        where                                             (
                                                           0 if x ≤ 0
                                                 s(x) :=
                                                           1 otherwise
        is the element-wise function. Here, we make derivatives of L with respect to non-connected edges
        (i.e., zero elements of W̃ 2 , W̃ 1 , and b̃1 ) zeros by element-wise multiplication with s(W̃ 2 ), s(W̃ 1 ),
        and s(b̃1 ) because we do not consider non-connected edges as variables.
Step 7: Using the fact that the weights and bias that are not in the active paths do not contribute to
        computing L, we deduce that the derivatives of L with respect to such weights and bias are zero. On
        the other hand, the derivatives of L with respect to the weights and bias that are in the support of
        indices in H must be strictly positive because the special structure of g̃ (i.e., the same structure as
        the sparse decoder, g, except all the nonzero weights and bias are one and the nonlinear activation
        functions are identity functions), choosing the all-ones vector as input vector, and defining the target
        vector as above should induce the positive gradient to reduce the L. Thus, active path weights and
        bias are obtained by
                                                W a2 = (W 2 S) s(∇W̃ 2 L)
                                               W a1 = W 1         s(∇W̃ 1 L)
                                                 ba1 = b1        s(∇b̃1 L).
Step 8: Removing zero rows and zero columns of the active path weights and bias, W a2 , W a1 , and ba1 yields
                                                                             sn
        the subnet weights and bias, which are denoted as W sn      sn
                                                             2 , W 1 , and b1 , respectively. Then the
                 sn
        subnet, g is given by
                                                                          sn
                                              g sn (x̂) = W sn    sn
                                                            2 σ(W 1 x̂ + b1 ).
    This subnet strategy works for neural networks of arbitrary depth. However, we have illustrated it in
the context of the neural network with one hidden layer. It is because that is what we use to achieve enough
speed up. Please see Fig. 7 for an argument of a shallow over a deep network.
    Remark 4.1. To count flops of NM-LSPG and NM-LSPG-HR, let m, f , z, and b denote FOM size,
ROM size, the size of subnet output, and the number of nodes in the hidden layer to compute one output
element of the sparse decoder, respectively. Then, the flop counts of NM-LSPG is O(mbf ) and the flop
counts of NM-LSPG-HR is O(zbf ) + O(f z 2 ). Thus, if z is small e.g., z 2 < m, speed-up can be achieved.
For full details, see Appendix B.
                                                            15
                    (a) Shallow network                                                  (b) Deep network


     Fig. 7. Illustration of the effect on the sparsity of the active path for shallow network vs deep network. The shallow
network provides a sparser network than the deep network in the subnet. Therefore, the shallow network is expected to achieve
a higher speed-up than the deep network.




    5. Error analysis. We present error analysis of the NM-LSPG-HR method. The error analysis is based
on [43] and we added an oblique projection matrix for a hyper-reduction method. A posteriori discrete-time
error bounds for NM-Galerkin and NM-LSPG without any hyper-reduction are derived in [43]. Here, we
apply a linear multi-step method described in Appendix A.

     Theorem 5.1. Let Z ∈ RNs ×nz with nz  Ns denote a sampling matrix, P ∈ RNs ×Ns be an oblique
projection matrix used in NM-Galerkin-HR and NM-LSPG-HR, i.e., P = PNM-Galerkin-HR for NM-Galerkin-
HR and P = PNM-LSPG-HR for NM-LSPG-HR, and r̃n ∈ RNs denote the nonlinear residual term, which is
defined by replacing xn with x̃n := xref + g (x̂n ) for n ∈ N(Nt ) in residual functions defined in Section 2.1
and Appendix A, e.g., the residual with the backward Euler time integrator is defined in Sections 3.4 and
4.3.2. Then, if the velocity f is Lipschitz continuous with the Lipschitz constant L and the time step size ∆t
is sufficiently small such that ∆t < γγ21|β|α00|L| , we have the following error bound
                                                                1
                  kxn − xref − g(x̂n )k2 ≤                                        kPr̃n (xref + g(x̂n ))k2
                                                 kPk2 (γ1 − γ2 |β0|α|∆tL
                                                                     0|
                                                                         )|α0 |
(5.1)                                            k
                                                 X      |αj | + |βj |∆tL
                                             +                  |β0 |∆tL
                                                                                 kxn−j − xref − g(x̂n−j )k2
                                                 j=1 (γ1 − γ2     |α0 | )|α0 |
for NM-Galerkin-HR and
                                                         1
           kxn − xref − g(x̂n )k2 ≤                                       min kPr̃n (v̂; x̂n−1 , · · · , x̂n−k , µ)k2
                                          kPk2 (γ1 |α0 | − γ2 |β0 |∆tL) v̂∈Rns
(5.2)                                    k
                                         X       |αj | + |βj |∆tL
                                     +                               kxn−j − xref − g(x̂n−j )k2
                                         j=1
                                             (γ 1 0 | − γ2 |β0 |∆tL)
                                                 |α
for NM-LSPG-HR, where coefficients αj , βj ∈ R, j = 0, · · · , k define a particular linear multi-step scheme
and γ1 , γ2 ∈ R are 0 < γ1 , γ2 ≤ 1.
                                                                16
      Proof. We have
                                         k
                                         X                    k
                                                              X
(5.3)                      r n (xn ) =         αj xn−j − ∆t         βj f (xn−j ) = 0,
                                         j=0                  j=0
                                                                                                
                                         Xk                            k
                                                                       X
(5.4)         Pr̃n (xref + g(x̂n )) = P    αj (xref + g(x̂n−j )) − ∆t   βj f (xref + g (x̂n−j ))
                                               j=0                                 j=0
               Ns                                                               ns
where xn ∈ R        denotes FOM solution and xref + g(x̂n ), x̂n ∈ R                 is approximate solution.




      Subtracting Eq. (5.3) from Eq. (5.4) gives
                               

  −Pr̃n (xref + g(x̂n )) = P α0 (xn − xref − g(x̂n )) − ∆tβ0 (f (xn ) − f (xref + g(x̂n )))
                                                                                                                       
                               k
                               X                                             k
                                                                             X
                           +         αj (xn−j − xref − g(x̂n−j )) − ∆t             βj (f (xn−j ) − f (xref + g(x̂n−j ))) .
                               j=1                                           j=1

We can re-write this in the following form
                                                                 
                             β0 ∆t
  P xn − xref − g(x̂n ) −           (f (xn ) − f (xref + g(x̂n ))) =
                              α0
  |                              {z                               }
                                  I
                                                                                                                    
                                        k                                    k
  1                                 1 X                                  ∆t X
− Pr̃n (xref + g(x̂n )) + P −            αj (xn−j − xref − g(x̂n−j )) +        βj (f (xn−j ) − f (xref + g(x̂n−j )))
  α0                               α0 j=1                                α0 j=1
|                                                           {z                                                       }
                                                                      II
Applying the reverse triangle inequality gives
                                                                β0 ∆t
                 kIk2 ≥ kP(xn − xref − g(x̂n ))k2 −                   P(f (xn ) − f (xref + g(x̂n )))   .
                                                                 α0                                   2
Now, we use relationships
                            kP(xn − xref − g(x̂n ))k2 = γ1 kPk2 kxn − xref − g(x̂n )k2
and
                     kP(f (xn ) − f (xref + g(x̂n )))k2 = γ2 kPk2 kf (xn ) − f (xref + g(x̂n ))k2
where 0 < γ1 ≤ 1 and 0 < γ2 ≤ 1. Then, we have
                                                                          β0 ∆t
             kIk2 ≥ γ1 kPk2 kxn − xref − g(x̂n )k2 − γ2 kPk2                    (f (xn ) − f (xref + g(x̂n )))
                                                                            α0                                 2
                                                                     β0 ∆t
                    = kPk2 γ1 kxn − xref − g(x̂n )k2 − γ2                  (f (xn ) − f (xref + g(x̂n )))    .
                                                                      α0                                  2

If f is Lipschitz continuous with L and ∆t is sufficiently small such that ∆t < γγ21|β|α00|L| , we have
                                                               
                                                     |β0 |∆tL
(5.5)                          kIk2 ≥ kPk2 γ1 − γ2                 kxn − xref − g(x̂n )k2 .
                                                        |α0 |
With triangle inequality and Lipschitz continuity of f , we have
                                                                k
                   1                                      1 X
(5.6) kIIk2 ≤           kPr̃n (xref + g(x̂n ))k2 + kPk2            ((|αj | + |βj |∆tL)kxn−j − xref − g(x̂n−j )k2 ) .
                  |α0 |                                  |α0 | j=1
                                                               17
Combining Eq. (5.5) and (5.6) yields
                                                              1
               kxn − xref − g(x̂n )k2 ≤                                         kPr̃n (xref + g(x̂n ))k2
                                               kPk2 (γ1 − γ2 |β0|α|∆tL
                                                                   0|
                                                                       )|α0 |
(5.7)                                          k
                                               X      |αj | + |βj |∆tL
                                           +                  |β0 |∆tL
                                                                               kxn−j − xref − g(x̂n−j )k2 .
                                               j=1 (γ1 − γ2     |α0 | )|α0 |
The error bound for NM-Galerkin-HR Eq. (5.1) is proved. Furthermore, noting that NM-LSPG-HR solution
x̂n minimizes the term kPr̃n (xref +g(x̂n ))k2 in Eq. (5.7) proves the error bound for NM-LSPG-HR Eq.(5.2).

    From the error bound for NM-LSPG-HR, we know that the NM-LSPG-HR solutions satisfy sequential
minimization of the error bound.
     6. Numerical results. We demonstrate the accuracy and speed-up of the nonlinear manifold reduced
order model for two advection-dominated problems: (i) a parameterized 1D inviscid Burgers equation in
Section 6.1 and (ii) a parameterized 2D viscous Burgers equation with a large Reynolds number (i.e., the
advection-dominated case) in Section 6.2. The ROMs are trained with solution snapshot associated with
train parameters in a parameter space and are used to predict the solution of the parameter that is not
included in the train parameters. We refer this to the predictive case. The accuracy of ROM solution x̃(·; µ)
is assessed from its maximum relative error:

                                                               kx̃(tn ; µ) − x(tn ; µ)k2
                                                                                        
                        maximum relative error = max
                                                    n∈N(Nt )         kx(tn ; µ)k2
where x is the corresponding FOM solution. We also introduce the projection errors for the lower bounds
of LS-ROMs and NM-ROMs maximum  v       relative errors:
                                u Nt                                            ,v u Nt
                                uX                                                 uX
                                                 T                             2
(6.1)        projection error = t    k I − ΦΦ (x(tn ; µ) − x (µ)) k            ref
                                                                                    t
                                                                                          2kx(tn ; µ)k2              2
                                    n=1                                                              n=1
for linear subspace projection and
                          v                                                                                 ,v
                          u Nt                                                                               u Nt
                          uX                                                                                 uX
                                k (x(tn ; µ) − x                                n ; µ) − x                2       kx(tn ; µ)k2
(6.2) projection error = t                           ref (µ)) − g ◦ h (x(t                          (µ)) k   t
                                                                                              ref          2                 2
                             n=1                                                                               n=1
for nonlinear manifold projection, where Φ denotes a POD basis matrix, and the scaled decoder g and the
scaled encoder h are a nonlinear manifold and its approximate inverse function that are obtained from an
autoencoder, respectively. The computational cost is measured in terms of the CPU wall time. Specifically,
timing is obtained by performing calculations on an Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2637 v3 @ 3.50 GHz and
DDR4 Memory @ 1866 MT/s. The autoencoders are trained on a NVIDIA Quadro M6000 GPU with 3072
NVIDIA CUDA Cores and 12 GB GDDR5 GPU Memory using PyTorch [55] which is the open source
machine learning frame work.
    6.1. 1D inviscid Burgers’ equation. We consider a parameterized 1D inviscid Burgers’ equation
                               ∂u(x, t; µ)              ∂u(x, t; µ)
(6.3)                                      + u(x, t; µ)             = 0,
                                  ∂t                       ∂x
                                         x ∈ Ω = [0, 2]
                                                    t ∈ [0, T ],
where u ∈ R denotes a scalar-valued time dependent state variable with the periodic boundary condition
                                                   u(2, t; µ) = u(0, t; µ)
and the initial condition
                                               1 + µ2 sin 2πx − π2 + 1
                                                                     
                                                                                     if 0 ≤ x ≤ 1
                            u(x, 0; µ) =
                                               1                                     otherwise
where µ ∈ D = [0.9, 1.1] is a parameter. Discretizing the space domain Ω into nx − 1 uniform mesh gives nx
grid points xi = (i − 1)∆x where i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , nx } and ∆x = nx2−1 . We denote the discrete solutions on
                                                              18
                                                                                                     ui −ui−1
grid points as ui (t; µ) = u(xi , t; µ), where i ∈ N(nx ). Then, the backward difference scheme ∂u
                                                                                                ∂x ≈    ∆x
yields the semi-discretized equation which is written by
                                                      dU
                                                           = f (U )
                                                       dt
where U = (u1 , u2 , · · · , unx −1 )T and f : Rnx −1 → Rnx −1 is in the form
                                                       1
                                           f (U ) = −     (M U U + BU )
                                                      ∆x
where                                                                                 
                       1                                             unx −1
                  −1 1                                                   0           
           M =                                           , B=                                        ,
                                                                                     
                              . ..  . ..                                     ..        
                                                                              .      
                                −1    1 (n −1)×(n −1)                                  0 (n −1)×(n −1)
                                             x      x                                        x    x

with denoting element-wise multiplication.
     For a time integrator, we use the backward Euler scheme with time step size ∆t = nTt , where T is final
time and nt is the number of time steps. We set T = 0.5, nx = 1001, and nt = 500.
     For the training process, we collect solution snapshots associated with the parameter µ ∈ Dtrain =
{0.9, 1.1} such that ntrain = 2 at which the FOM is solved. Then, the number of train data points is
ntrain · (nt + 1) = 1002 and 10% of the train data are used for validation purpose. We employ the Adam
optimizer [37] for SGD with initial learning rate 0.001 which decreases by a factor of 10 when a training loss
stagnates for 10 successive training epochs. We set the number of nodes in the hidden layer of the encoder,
M1 = 2000, and the number of nodes in the hidden layer of the decoder, M2 = 12024. The weights and
bias of the autoencoder are initialized via Kaiming initialization [32]. The size of the batch is 20 and the
maximum number of epochs is 10, 000. The training process is stopped if the loss on the validation dataset
stagnates for 200 epochs.
     After the training is done, the NM-ROMs and LS-ROMs solve the Eq. (6.3) with the target parameter
µ = 1 which is not included in the train dataset for training the autoencoder and the linear subspace.
Fig. 8 shows the relative error versus the reduced dimension ns . It also shows the projection errors for
LS-ROMs and NM-ROMs, which are defined in (6.1) and (6.2). These are the lower bounds for LS-ROMs
and NM-ROMs, respectively. As expected the relative errors for the NM-ROMs are lower than the ones for
the LS-ROMs. We even observe that the relative errors of NM-ROMs are even lower than the lower bounds
of LS-ROMs.


                                       100



                                      10-1



                                      10-2



                                      10-3
                                                        5        10           15


                          Fig. 8. 1D Burgers’ equation. Relative errors vs reduced dimensions.


    To see the trends regarding the number of training parameter instances, we increase the number of
                                                            19
parameters starting from ntrain = 2 with the fixed reduced dimension ns = 5 to achieve less than 1%
maximum relative error for NM-ROMs. In Fig. 9, we observe that ntrain = 2 is enough.


                                             10-1




                                             10-2




                                             10-3
                                                    2        4           6       8        10


     Fig. 9. 1D Burgers’ equation. Relative errors vs the number of parameter instances. We use Dtrain = {0.9, 1.1} for
ntrain = 2, Dtrain = {0.9, 0.95, 1.05, 1, 1} for ntrain = 4, Dtrain = {0.9, 0.9 + 31 , 0.9 + 23 , 1 + 31 , 1 + 23 , 1.1} for ntrain = 6, and
Dtrain = {0.9, 0.925, 0.95, 0.975, 1.025, 1.05, 1.075, 1.1} for ntrain = 8.

    LS-ROMs with ns = 5 are able to achieve speed-up, but their accuracies are not as good as NM-ROMs.
For example, LS-ROMs are about 5 to 6 times faster than FOM on average and have a maximum relative
error of 6 %. NM-ROMs solve the problem with less than the maximum relative error of 1 %. For LS-
ROMs, a hyper-reduction improves speed-up (e.g., 9 to 10 times faster than FOM) but accuracy doesn’t
get better. On the other hand, NM-ROMs without a hyper-reduction do not achieve any speed-up with
respect to the corresponding FOM simulation. For example, the FOM simulation takes 1.30 seconds, while
the NM-Galerkin and NM-LSPG with ns = 5 takes 1.67 and 1.35 seconds, respectively. Therefore, the
hyper-reduction is essential to achieve a speed-up with a reasonable accuracy for the NM-ROMs. Now, we
compute the maximum relative error and wall-clock time for the hyper-reduced ROMs, i.e., NM-LSPG-HR
and LS-LSPG-HR, by varying the number of residual basis and residual samples with the fixed number of
training parameter instances ntrain = 2 and the reduced dimension ns = 5 and show the results in Table 1.
Although the LS-LSPG-HR can achieve a better speed-up than the NM-LSPG-HR, the relative error of the
LS-LSPG-HR is too large, e.g., the relative errors of around 6%. On the other hand, the NM-LSPG-HR
achieves much better accuracy, i.e., a relative error of around 1%, than the LS-LSPG-HR with a speedup of
higher than 2.
                                                       Table 1
    The top 6 maximum relative errors and wall-clock times at different numbers of residual basis and samples which range
from 30 to 50.

                                                 NM-LSPG-HR                                            LS-LSPG-HR
   Residual basis                 31       33      36   32   40                32       30       30      30   31   41                41
  Residual samples                47       49      40   47   42                46       47       48      49   49   49                48
 Max. rel. error (%)             1.03     1.07    1.18 1.23 1.23              1.25     6.07     6.08    6.08 6.09 6.11              6.11
 Wall-clock time (sec)           0.63     0.51    0.49 0.50 0.51              0.50     0.14     0.13    0.13 0.23 0.14              0.13
       Speed-up                  2.07     2.53    2.63 2.62 2.56              2.62     9.29     9.80    9.71 5.65 9.63              9.82

    Fig. 10 shows solutions in both space and time domain of FOM, NM-LSPG-HR, and LS-LSPG-HR with
the reduced dimension being ns = 5. For NM-LSPG-HR, 31 residual basis and 47 residual samples are used
and for LS-LSPG-HR, 30 residual basis and 47 residual samples are used. In fact, the NM-LSPG-HR is able
to achieve an accuracy as good as the NM-LSPG for some combinations of the small number of residual
basis and residual samples.
                                                                    20
             (a) FOM                               (b) NM-LSPG-HR                          (c) LS-LSPG-HR

                Fig. 10. A space–time solution instances of FOM and ROMs for 1D Burgers’ equation.




     We look into the numerical tests to see the generalization capability of the NM-LSPG and NM-LSPG-
HR, i.e., the robustness of the NM-LSPG and NM-LSPG-HR outside of the trained domain. The training
sample point set, µ ∈ Dtrain = {0.9, 1.1}, is used to train a NM-LSPG-HR. Then the trained NM-LSPG-HR
model is used to predict the following parameter points, µ ∈ Dtest = {µ|µ = 0.6+0.02i, i = 0, 1, · · · , 30}. The
residual basis dimension and the number of residual samples for each test case are given in Table 2. Fig. 11
shows the maximum relative error over the test range of the parameter points. Note that the NM-LSPG and
NM-LSPG-HR are the most accurate within the range of the training points, i.e., [0.9, 1.1]. As the parameter
points go beyond the training parameter domain, the accuracy of the NM-LSPG and NM-LSPG-HR start
to deteriorate gradually. This implies that the NM-LSPG and NM-LSPG-HR have a trust region. Its trust
region should be determined by an application. For example, if the application is okay with the maximum
relative error of 10 %, then the trust region of this particular NM-LSPG-HR is [0.6, 1.2]. However, if the
application requires a higher accuracy, e.g., the maximum relative error of 2 %, then the trust region of the
NM-LSPG-HR is [0.82, 1.12]. Note that the average speed-up of the NM-LSPG-HR for all the test cases is
2.72 (see Table 2).



    6.2. 2D Burgers’ equation. We now consider a parameterized 2D viscous Burgers’ equation
                                                     2
                                                     ∂ u ∂2u
                                                                 
                             ∂u     ∂u    ∂u     1
(6.4)                            +u    +v    =           +
                              ∂t    ∂x    ∂y    Re ∂x2      ∂y 2
                                                     2
                                                            ∂2v
                                                                 
                              ∂v    ∂v    ∂v     1   ∂ v
                                 +u    +v    =           +
                              ∂t    ∂x    ∂y    Re ∂x2      ∂y 2
                                                   (x, y) ∈ Ω = [0, 1] × [0, 1]
                                                        t ∈ [0, 2],
with the boundary condition
                    u(x, y, t; µ) = v(x, y, t; µ) = 0   on Γ = {(x, y)|x ∈ {0, 1}, y ∈ {0, 1}}
                                                          21
                                                         Table 2
     The residual basis dimension and the number of residual samples for each test parameter µ. The wall-clock time and the
speed-up of the NM-LSPG-HR with respect to the corresponding FOM are also reported.

                          µ     Residual basis    Residual samples   Wall-clock time (sec)   Speed-up
                         0.60        46                  48                  0.54              2.41
                         0.62        37                  39                  0.46              2.83
                         0.64        37                  39                  0.47              2.77
                         0.66        44                  46                  0.52              2.50
                         0.68        42                  44                  0.48              2.71
                         0.70        42                  44                  0.48              2.71
                         0.72        42                  44                  0.48              2.71
                         0.74        42                  44                  0.48              2.71
                         0.76        43                  45                  0.53              2.45
                         0.78        36                  45                  0.46              2.83
                         0.80        38                  47                  0.47              2.77
                         0.82        38                  47                  0.47              2.77
                         0.84        38                  47                  0.47              2.77
                         0.86        38                  47                  0.47              2.77
                         0.88        37                  46                  0.46              2.83
                         0.90        33                  33                  0.45              2.89
                         0.92        33                  33                  0.46              2.83
                         0.94        33                  33                  0.46              2.83
                         0.96        33                  33                  0.45              2.89
                         0.98        31                  47                  0.45              2.89
                         1.00        31                  47                  0.45              2.89
                         1.02        33                  49                  0.48              2.71
                         1.04        31                  48                  0.46              2.83
                         1.06        30                  48                  0.46              2.83
                         1.08        33                  39                  0.48              2.71
                         1.10        33                  40                  0.48              2.71
                         1.12        33                  42                  0.48              2.71
                         1.14        44                  49                  0.54              2.41
                         1.16        31                  48                  0.48              2.71
                         1.18        31                  48                  0.47              2.77
                         1.20        44                  48                  0.57              2.28


                                  0.08

                                  0.06

                                  0.04

                                  0.02

                                         0
                                         0.6            0.8              1             1.2


            Fig. 11. The comparison of the NM-LSPG-HR and NM-LSPG on the maximum relative error vs µ


and the initial condition                
                                             µ sin (2πx) · sin (2πy) if (x, y) ∈ [0, 0.5] × [0, 0.5]
                      u(x, y, 0; µ) =
                                             0                       otherwise
                                         
                                             µ sin (2πx) · sin (2πy) if (x, y) ∈ [0, 0.5] × [0, 0.5]
                       v(x, y, 0; µ) =
                                             0                       otherwise
                                                              22
where µ ∈ D = [0.9, 1.1] is a parameter and u(x, y, t; µ) and v(x, y, t; µ) denote the x and y directional
velocities, respectively, with u : Ω × [0, 2] × D → R and v : Ω × [0, 2] × D → R defined as the solutions to
Eq. (6.4), and Re is a Reynolds number which is set Re = 10000. In the case of Re = 10000 (an advection-
dominated case), the FOM solution snapshot shows slowly decaying singular values compared to the case of
Re = 100 as shown in Fig. 12 and we observe that a sharp gradient, i.e., a shock, appears in Figs. 15(a) and
15(d).




           1010                                                                1010


            100                                                                 100

               -10                                                                -10
          10                                                                 10


          10-20                                                              10-20
                     0                100                   200                         0                 100                   200

                              (a) Re = 100                                                      (b) Re = 10000

                                Fig. 12. The effect of Reynolds number on the singular value decay.




     Discretizing the space domain Ω into nx −1 and ny −1 uniform meshes in x and y directions, respectively,
gives nx × ny grid points (xi , yj ). xi is given by xi = (i − 1)∆x where i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , nx } and ∆x = nx1−1 and
yj is given by yj = (j − 1)∆y where j ∈ {1, 2, · · · , ny } and ∆y = ny1−1 . We denote the discrete solutions on
grid points as ui,j (t; µ) = u(xi , yj , t; µ) and vi,j (t; µ) = v(xi , yj , t; µ), where i ∈ N(nx ) and j ∈ N(ny ). Let
nxy = (nx − 2) × (ny − 2). Then, the backward difference scheme for the first spatial derivative terms
                                                                ∂(·)        (·)i,j − (·)i−1,j
                                                                        ≈                       ,
                                                                ∂x                 ∆x
                                                                ∂(·)        (·)i,j − (·)i,j−1
                                                                        ≈
                                                                ∂y                 ∆y
and the central difference scheme for the second spatial derivative terms
                                                        ∂ 2 (·)     (·)i+1,j − 2(·)i,j + (·)i−1,j
                                                                ≈                                        ,
                                                         ∂x2                       ∆x2
                                                        ∂ 2 (·)     (·)i,j+1 − 2(·)i,j + (·)i,j−1
                                                                ≈
                                                         ∂y 2                      ∆y 2
yield the semi-discretized equation which is written by
                                                                    dU
                                                                           = f u (U , V ),
                                                                      dt
                                                                    dV
                                                                           = f v (U , V )
                                                                      dt
where U = (u2,2 , u3,2 , · · · , unx −2,2 , u2,3 , u3,3 , · · · , unx −2,3 , · · · u2,ny −2 , u3,ny −2 , · · · , unx −2,ny −2 )T and V =
(v2,2 , v3,2 , · · · , vnx −2,2 , v2,3 , v3,3 , · · · , vnx −2,3 , · · · v2,ny −2 , v3,ny −2 , · · · , vnx −2,ny −2 )T with superscript T stand-
ing for the transpose operation and f u : Rnxy × Rnxy → Rnxy and f v : Rnxy × Rnxy → Rnxy are in the
                                                                      23
form
                                             1                      1
                           f u (U , V ) = −    U (M U − bux1 ) −      V (N U − buy1 )
                                            ∆x                     ∆y
                                            1                       1
                                        +       (D x U + bux2 ) +        (D y U + buy2 )
                                          Re∆x2                   Re∆y 2
                                             1                      1
                           f v (U , V ) = −    U (M V − bvx1 ) −      V (N V − bvy1 )
                                            ∆x                     ∆y
                                            1                       1
                                        +       (D x V + bvx2 ) +        (D y V + bvy2 )
                                          Re∆x2                   Re∆y 2
where                                                                                                               
                                                                             1
                   Mb                                                        −1                1                    
               M =
                                 ..              
                                                                  ,     Mb = 
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                    ,
                                       .                                                      ..     ..             
                                                                                                 .    .             
                                            Mb         nxy ×nxy                                       −1            1 (n −2)×(n −2)
                                                                                                                             x       x
                                                                 
                    Nb                                                                                                  
                  −N b                                                                           1
                                    Nb                            
               N =
                                                                 
                                                                                    ,       Nb = 
                                                                                                          ..         
                                                                                                                                     ,
                                    ..            ..                                                           .     
                                      .        .                 
                                                                                                                     1 (n −2)×(n −2)
                                              −N b         Nb         nxy ×nxy
                                                                                                                                 x       x

                                                                                          T
             bux1 =  u1,2 , u1,3 , · · · , u1,ny −1 1×(n −2) ⊗ (1, 0, · · · , 0)1×(nx −2) ,
                                                        y
                                                                                          T
             buy1 = (1, 0, · · · , 0)1×(ny −2) ⊗ (u2,1 , u3,1 , · · · , unx −1,1 )1×(nx −2) ,
                                                                                         T
             bvx1 = v1,2 , v1,3 , · · · , v1,ny −1 1×(n −2) ⊗ (1, 0, · · · , 0)1×(nx −2) ,
                                                       y
                                                                                          T
             bvy1 = (1, 0, · · · , 0)1×(ny −2) ⊗ (v2,1 , v3,1 , · · · , vnx −1,1 )1×(nx −2) ,
                                                                                    
                     D xb                                               −2 1
              Dx = 
                             ..           
                                                      , D xb =  1 . . . 1 
                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                             ,
                                 .         
                                             D xb      nxy ×nxy
                                                                                               1 −2 (n −2)×(n −2)
                                                                                                        x      x
                                                                                                     
                     −2D yb                D yb                                                 1
              D y =  D yb
                                          ..             
                                                                                ,       D yb = 
                                                                                                 ..    
                                                                                                                       ,
                                              .      D yb                                           .  
                                           D yb     −2D yb n                                           1 (n −2)×(n −2)
                                                                      xy ×nxy                                                    x       x

             bux2 = (u1,2 , 0, · · · , 0, unx ,2 , u1,3 , 0, · · · , 0, unx ,3 , · · · , u1,ny −1 , 0, · · · , 0, unx ,ny −1 )T ,
             buy2 = (u2,1 , u3,1 , · · · , unx −1,1 , 0, · · · , 0, u2,ny , u3,ny , · · · , unx −1,ny )T ,
             bvx2 = (v1,2 , 0, · · · , 0, vnx ,2 , v1,3 , 0, · · · , 0, vnx ,3 , · · · , v1,ny −1 , 0, · · · , 0, vnx ,ny −1 )T ,
             bvy2 = (v2,1 , v3,1 , · · · , vnx −1,1 , 0, · · · , 0, v2,ny , v3,ny , · · · , vnx −1,ny )T
with    and ⊗ denoting the element-wise multiplication and the Kronecker product, respectively.
   For a time integrator, we use the backward Euler scheme with time step size ∆t = n2t , where nt is the
number of time steps. We set nx = 60, ny = 60, and nt = 1500.
     For the training process, we collect solution snapshots associated with the parameter µ ∈ Dtrain =
{0.9, 0.95, 1.05, 1.1} such that ntrain = 4 at which the FOM is solved. Then, the number of train data points
is ntrain · (nt + 1) = 6004 and 10% of the train data are used for validation purpose. We employ the Adam
optimizer [37] with the SGD and the initial learning rate of 0.001, which decreases by a factor of 10 when a
training loss stagnates for 10 successive training epochs. Here, we have two autoencoders. One for U vector
and the other for V vector. The reason why we have such two autoencoders is that we can use less memory
for training process compared to one autoencoder for (U T , V T )T vector and train both of them at the same
                                                                           24
time. We set the number of nodes in hidden layer in the encoder, M1 = 6728, and the number of nodes
in hidden layer in the decoder, M2 = 33730. The weights and bias of the autoencoder are initialized via
Kaiming initialization [32] as in the first numerical example. The size of the batch is 240 and the maximum
number of epochs is 10, 000. The training process is stopped if the loss on the validation dataset stagnates
for 200 epochs.
     After the training is done, the NM-ROMs and LS-ROMs solve the Eq. (6.4) with the target parameter
µ = 1 ,which is not included in the train dataset for training the autoencoder and the linear subspace. Fig. 13
shows the relative error versus the reduced dimension ns for both NM-ROMs and LS-ROMs. It also shows
the projection errors for LS-ROMs and NM-ROMs, which are defined in (6.1) and (6.2). These are the lower
bounds for LS-ROMs and NM-ROMs, respectively. As expected the relative errors for the NM-ROMs are
lower than the ones for the LS-ROMs. We even observe that the relative errors of NM-LSPG are even lower
than the lower bounds of LS-ROMs. One notable observation is that NM-Galerkin is not able to achieve
a good accuracy, while the NM-LSPG does. Another observation is that LS-ROMs struggle more for this
problem than the 1D invisid Burgers’ equations, e.g., some LS-ROMs fail to converge.



      100                                                       100



     10-1                                                      10-1



     10-2                                                      10-2



     10-3                                                      10-3
               5          10           15         20                      5          10           15        20

                   (a) State variable, u                                      (b) State variable, v


   Fig. 13. 2D Burgers’ equation. Relative errors vs reduced dimensions. A maximum relative error that is 1 means the
ROM failed to solve the problem.

      To see the trends regarding the number of training parameter instances, we increase the number of
parameters starting from ntrain = 2 with the fixed reduced dimension ns = 5 to achieve less than 1%
maximum relative error for NM-ROMs. In Fig. 14, we observe that ntrain = 4 is enough.
      Both NM-Galerkin and LS-ROMs without a hyper-reduction do not achieve any speed-up with respect
to the corresponding FOM simulation. For example, the FOM simulation takes 140.67 seconds, while the
NM-Galerkin, NM-LSPG, LS-Galerkin, and LS-LSPG with ns = 5 takes 143.41, 78.22, 519.12 and 2193.70
seconds, respectively. Although NM-LSPG is able to achieve a speed-up, it is not considerable. Therefore,
the hyper-reduction is essential to achieve a considerable speed-up with a reasonable accuracy.
      We compute the maximum relative error by choosing the larger of the two errors between the maximum
relative error of u and the maximum relative error of v. We vary the number of residual basis and residual
samples, with the fixed number of training parameter instances ntrain = 4 and the reduced dimension ns = 5,
and measure the wall-clock time. The results are shown in Table 3. Although the LS-LSPG-HR can achieve
better speedup than the NM-LSPG-HR, the relative error of the LS-LSPG-HR is too large to be reasonable,
e.g., the relative errors of around 37%. On the other hand, the NM-LSPG-HR achieves much better accuracy,
i.e., a relative error of around 1%, than the LS-LSPG-HR with a good speedup, i.e., a speedup of higher
than 11.
                                                         25
       100                                                                   100



      10-1                                                                 10-1



      10-2                                                                 10-2



      10-3                                                                 10-3
             2          4            6          8          10                      2            4          6           8           10

                       (a) State variable, u                                                   (b) State variable, v


      Fig. 14. 2D Burgers’ equation. Relative errors vs the number of parameter instances. The following parameter sets are
used: Dtrain = {0.9, 1.1} for ntrain = 2, Dtrain = {0.9, 0.95, 1.05, 1.)} for ntrain = 4, Dtrain = {0.9, 0.9 + 13 , 0.9 + 23 , 1 + 13 , 1 +
2
3
  , 1.1} for ntrain = 6, and Dtrain = {0.9, 0.925, 0.95, 0.975, 1.025, 1.05, 1.075, 1.1} for ntrain = 8.

                                                       Table 3
    The top 6 maximum relative errors and wall-clock times at different numbers of residual basis and samples which range
from 40 to 60.

                                               NM-LSPG-HR                                               LS-LSPG-HR
   Residual basis              55      56        51    53    54              44         59       53       53    53           53     53
  Residual samples             58      59        54    56    57              47         59       58       59    56           55     53
 Max. rel. error (%)          0.93    0.94      0.95  0.97  0.97            0.98       34.38   37.73    37.84 37.95        37.96   37.97
 Wall-clock time (sec)       12.15    12.35    12.09 12.14 12.29           12.01       5.26     5.02     4.86  5.05         4.75   7.18
       Speed-up              11.58    11.39    11.63 11.58 11.44           11.71       26.76   28.02    28.95 27.83        29.61   19.58


      Fig. 15 shows solutions at the last time step of FOM, NM-LSPG-HR, and LS-LSPG-HR with the reduced
dimension being ns = 5. For NM-LSPG-HR, 55 residual basis dimension and 58 residual samples are used
and for LS-LSPG-HR, 59 residual basis dimension and 59 residual samples are used. Both FOM and NM-
LSPG-HR show good agreement in their solutions, while the LS-LSPG-HR is not able to achieve a good
accuracy. In fact, the NM-LSPG-HR is able to achieve an accuracy as good as the NM-LSPG for some
combinations of the small number of residual basis and residual samples as in Section 6.1.
      We look into the numerical tests to see the generalization capability of the NM-LSPG and NM-LSPG-HR,
i.e., the robustness of the NM-LSPG and NM-LSPG-HR outside of the trained domain. The training sample
point set, µ ∈ Dtrain = {0.9, 0.95, 1.05, 1.1}, is used to train a NM-LSPG-HR. Then the trained NM-LSPG-
HR model is used to predict the following parameter points, µ ∈ Dtest = {µ|µ = 0.85+0.01i, i = 0, 1, · · · , 30}.
The residual basis dimension and the number of residual samples for each test case are given in Table 4.
Fig. 16 shows the maximum relative error over the test range of the parameter points. Note that the NM-
LSPG and NM-LSPG-HR are the most accurate within the range of the training points, i.e., [0.9, 1.1]. As
the parameter points go beyond the training parameter domain, the accuracy of the NM-LSPG and NM-
LSPG-HR start to deteriorate gradually. This implies that the NM-LSPG and NM-LSPG-HR have a trust
region. Its trust region should be determined by an application. For example, if the application is okay with
the maximum relative error of 10 %, then the trust region of this particular NM-LSPG-HR is [0.85, 1.15].
However, if the application requires a higher accuracy, e.g., the maximum relative error of 2 %, then the
trust region of the NM-LSPG-HR is [0.87, 1.08]. Note that the average speed-up of the NM-LSPG-HR for
                                                                    26
             (a) FOM, u                            (b) NM-LSPG-HR, u                     (c) LS-LSPG-HR, u




             (d) FOM, v                            (e) NM-LSPG-HR, v                     (f) LS-LSPG-HR, v

                     Fig. 15. Solution snapshots of FOM, NM-LSPG-HR, and LS-LSPG-HR at t = 2


all the test cases is 10.61 (see Table 4).


     0.15                                                      0.15


      0.1                                                       0.1


     0.05                                                      0.05


         0                                                         0
                  0.9            1           1.1                         0.9            1          1.1

                    (a) State variable, u                                  (b) State variable, v


             Fig. 16. The comparison of the NM-LSPG-HR and NM-LSPG on the maximum relative error vs µ


    7. Discussion & conclusion. In this work, we have successfully developed an accurate and efficient
nonlinear manifold based reduced order model. We demonstrated that the linear subspace based reduced
order model is not able to represent advection-dominated or sharp gradient solutions of 1D inviscid Burgers’
equation and 2D viscous Burgers’ equation with a high Reynolds number. However, our new approach, NM-
                                                         27
                                                         Table 4
     The residual basis dimension and the number of residual samples for each test parameter µ. The wall-clock time and the
speed-up of the NM-LSPG-HR with respect to the corresponding FOM are also reported.

                          µ     Residual basis   Residual samples   Wall-clock time (sec)   Speed-up
                         0.85        47                 59                  13.65             10.31
                         0.86        50                 50                  13.19             10.66
                         0.87        45                 45                  12.61             11.16
                         0.88        49                 50                  12.69             11.08
                         0.89        52                 52                  13.41             10.49
                         0.90        53                 57                  13.35             10.54
                         0.91        59                 59                  13.60             10.34
                         0.92        55                 58                  13.41             10.49
                         0.93        51                 54                  13.17             10.68
                         0.94        54                 57                  13.32             10.56
                         0.95        55                 58                  13.52             10.40
                         0.96        55                 58                  13.54             10.39
                         0.97        54                 57                  13.39             10.51
                         0.98        52                 55                  13.20             10.66
                         0.99        52                 55                  13.18             10.67
                         1.00        55                 58                  13.38             10.51
                         1.01        46                 49                  12.80             10.99
                         1.02        50                 53                  13.35             10.54
                         1.03        50                 53                  13.40             10.50
                         1.04        52                 53                  13.40             10.50
                         1.05        46                 58                  13.21             10.65
                         1.06        54                 57                  13.58             10.36
                         1.07        45                 57                  13.20             10.66
                         1.08        45                 57                  13.23             10.63
                         1.09        43                 55                  13.27             10.60
                         1.10        44                 48                  13.31             10.57
                         1.11        40                 43                  12.79             11.00
                         1.12        48                 59                  13.66             10.30
                         1.13        42                 51                  13.25             10.62
                         1.14        46                 49                  13.10             10.74
                         1.15        40                 50                  13.11             10.73



                            5
                       10




                       104



                          102                    103                     104


    Fig. 17. Computational cost vs FOM size. The figure shows that the higher the speed up will be achieved, the larger the
underlying FOM problem is. The graph is generated based on the computational cost analysis done in Appendix B
                                                             .


LSPG-HR, solves such problems accurately and efficiently. For 1D case, the NM-LSPG-HR method achieves
a good accuracy i.e., the maximum relative error of around 1% with the speed-up of higher than 2. For 2D
case, the NM-LSPG-HR method was able to achieve even better accuracy, i.e., the maximum relative error
                                                             28
of less than 1%, with even better speed-up of around 12 than the 1D case. We also presented a posteriori
error bounds for NM-Galerkin-HR and NM-LSPG-HR. The speed-up of the NM-LSPG-HR is achieved by
choosing the sparse shallow decoder as the nonlinear manifold and applying the efficient hyper-reduction
computation, which can be done by constructing a subnet. Furthermore, we expect more speed-up as the
FOM size increases because the difference in the computational cost between the FOM and NM-LSPG-HR
increases as shown in Fig. 17.
     Compared with the deep neural networks for computer vision and natural language processing applica-
tions, our neural networks are shallow with a small number of parameters. However, these networks were
able to capture the variation in our 1D and 2D Burgers’ simulations. A main future work for transferring this
work to more complex simulations, will be to find the right balance between a shallow network that is large
enough to capture the data variance and yet small enough to run faster than the FOM. Another future work
will be to find an efficient way of determining the proper size of the residual basis and the number of sample
points a priori. To find the optimal size of residual basis and the number of sample points for hyper-reduced
ROMs, we relied on test results. This issue is not just for NM-LSPG-HR but also for LS-LSPG-HR.

    Acknowledgments. This work was performed at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and was
supported by the LDRD program (project 20-FS-007). Youngkyu was also supported for this work through
generous funding from DTRA. Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory is operated by Lawrence Livermore
National Security, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy, National Nuclear Security Administration under
Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344 and LLNL-JRNL-814844.

    Appendix A. Time integrators.

     A.1. The linear multistep methods. Applying a linear k-step method to numerically solve Eq. (2.1)
yields an O∆E characterized by the following system of nonlinear algebraic residual function that needs to
be solved for the numerical solution xn ∈ RNs at each time instance:
                                                                k(tn )                   k(tn )
                                                                X                        X
                         n
                       r (xn ; xn−1 . . . , xn−k(tn ) , µ) :=            αjn xn−j − ∆t            βjn f n−j
                                                                j=0                      j=0

                                                          = 0,        n ∈ N(Nt ),
where coefficients αjn , βjn ∈ R, j = 0, . . . , k(tn ) define a particular linear multistep scheme. It is necessary
                                         Pk(tn )
for consistency to have α0n 6= 0 and j=0 αjn = 0. Here, k(tn )(≤ n) denotes the number of steps used by
the linear multistep method at time instance n. The linear multistep methods include the one-step Euler
methods, the implicit Adams–Moulton methods, the explicit Adams–Bashforth methods, and the Backward
Differentiation Formulas (BDFs).
     The second order Adams–Bashforth (AB) method numerically solves Eq. (2.1), by solving the following
nonlinear system of equations for xn at n-th time step:
                                                                              
                                                              3         1
                                        xn − xn−1 = ∆t          f n−1 − f n−2 ,
                                                              2         2
The residual function of the second AB method is defined as                             
                              n                                          3         1
                            r AB (xn ; xn−1 , µ) := xn − xn−1 − ∆t         f    − f        .
                                                                         2 n−1 2 n−2
    The second order Adams–Moulton (AM) method numerically solves Eq. (2.1), by solving the following
nonlinear system of equations for xn at n-th time step:
                                                        1
                                          xn − xn−1 =     ∆t(f n + f n−1 ),
                                                        2
The residual function of the second AM method is defined as
                                                                      1
(A.1)                       r nAM (xn ; xn−1 , µ) := xn − xn−1 − ∆t (f n + f n−1 ).
                                                                      2
    The 2-step BDF numerically solves Eq. (2.1), by solving the following nonlinear system of equations for
                                                           29
xn at n-th time step:
                                              4          1      2
                                       xn − xn−1 + xn−2 = ∆tf n ,
                                              3          3      3
The residual function of the two-step BDF method is defined as
                                                            4      1      2
(A.2)                  r nBDF (xn ; xn−1 , xn−2 , µ) := xn − xn−1 + xn−2 − ∆tf n .
                                                            3      3      3
    A.2. The midpoint Runge–Kutta method. The midpoint method, a 2-stage Runge–Kutta method,
takes the following two stages to advance at n-th time step of Eq. (2.1):
                                                           ∆t
                                            xn− 21 = xn−1 +   f
                                                            2 n−1
                                               xn = xn−1 + ∆tf n− 12 .

     Appendix B. Computational costs. Let’s denote the size of FOM and ROM as m and f , respectively.
Because of mathematical models that require local information, we need not only the indices selected from
the hyper-reduction, but also their neighbors. We denote the total number of indices as z and assume z  m,
z 2 < m and z > f (e.g., z = 10f ). For simplicity, we assume the mask matrix for the sparse decoder has
the same structure as the mask matrix for 1D Burgers equation as depicted in Section 3.2. To generate the
mask matrix, two variables b and δb are used, where b denotes the number of nodes in the hidden layer to
compute single output element and δb denotes the amount by which the block of b nodes shifts. Then, the
number of nodes in the hidden layer can be computed as M2 = b + (m − 1)δb.

     B.1. Computational costs of NM-LSPG. Since the decoder is a single hidden layer neural network,
the cost of the decoder and its Jacobian evaluation is O(mb) + O(M2 f ) and O(f M2 ) + O(mbf ), respectively.
Computing residual, r̃, includes only element-wise vector calcualtion, resulting in O(m). Jacobian of the
          ˜ can be computed using row-wise multiplication of matrix and vector because of local connectivity
residual, J,
of mathematical model (e.g., discrete 1D and 2D Burgers equation) in O(f m). For the Gauss–Newton
                                                       ˜ which requires O(f m) and O(f 2 m), respectively. It
method, we need to construct r̂ = J˜T r̃ and Jˆ = J˜T J,
                2                                   ˆ−1
also takes O(f ) to compute each update, δu = −J r̂, iteratively. Assuming the number of Gauss–Newton
iterations is in the same order for the given governing equation, we can factor out the number of iterations.
Thus, the total computational costs of NM-LSPG for each time step is O(f M2 ) + O(mbf ) + O(f 2 m). With
the assumption of M2 ≈ mδb, f < b, and δb < b, we have O(mbf ).

     B.2. Computational costs of NM-LSPG-HR. The size of the weight matrix connecting the hidden
                                                                     z
layer and the output layer is reduced to z by βM2 , where β = m         for the best case (z successive points are
selected) and β = 1 for the worst case (z uniformly separate points are selected). Note that when z is
small, it is possible to have β < 1 even for the worst case. Then, replacing m with z and M2 with βM2 in
the decoder and its Jacobian evaluation gives us O(zb) + O(βM2 f ) and O(f βM2 ) + O(zbf ), respectively.
Costs of computing residual, r̃HR = Z T r̃ and its Jacobian, J˜HR = Z T J˜ for NM-LSPG-HR are O(z) and
O(f z), respectively because the sampling matrix Z T selects z elements of the residual and z rows of its
Jacobian without constructing the sampling matrix. For the Gauss–Newton method, we need to construct
r̂ = J˜HR
       T
           P r̃HR and Jˆ = J˜HR
                             T
                                P J˜HR , where P is the pre-computed z × z matrix, which require O(f z) + O(z 2 )
and O(f z ) + O(f z), respectively. It also takes O(f 2 ) to compute each update, δu = −Jˆ−1 r̂, iteratively.
            2        2

Assuming the number of Gauss–Newton iterations is in the same order for the given governing equation, we
can factor out the number of iterations. Thus, the total computational costs of NM-LSPG-HR for each time
step is O(f βM2 ) + O(zbf ) + O(f z 2 ). With the assumption of M2 ≈ δbm, we have O(f βδbm) + O(zbf ) +
                                    z
O(f z 2 ). For the best case, β = m   , the computational costs is O(f zδb) + O(zbf ) + O(f z 2 ). Assuming δb < b,
we have O(zbf ) + O(f z ). For the worst case, β = 1, we have O(f δbm) + O(zbf ) + O(f z 2 ).
                           2


    B.3. Computational costs of LS-LSPG. The decoder g(x̂) and its Jacobian Jg (x̂) are replaced
with Φx̂ and Φ, respectively. Thus, the cost of Φx̂ is O(mf ) and the cost of its Jacobian evaluation is zero.
The costs of computing residual and its Jacobian are the same as for NM-LSPG . Also, the costs of the
Gauss–Newton method is the same as in Section B.1. Assuming the number of Gauss–Newton iterations is
                                                        30
in the same order for the given governing equation, we can factor out the number of iterations. Thus, the
total computational costs of LS-LSPG for each time step is O(f 2 m).
    B.4. Computational costs of LS-LSPG-HR. For LS-LSPG-HR, we construct reduced model with
the size of basis matrix ΦHR being z by f , where ΦHR := Z T Φ. Thus, the costs of ΦHR x̂ is O(zf ) and
the cost of its Jacobian evaluation is zero. The costs of computing residual and its Jacobian are the same as
for NM-LSPG-HR. Also, the costs of the Gauss–Newton method is the same as in Section B.2. Assuming
the number of Gauss–Newton iterations is in the same order for the given governing equation, we can factor
out the number of iterations. Thus, the total computational costs of LS-LSPG-HR for each time step is
O(f 2 z) + O(f z 2 ).

                                                        REFERENCES

 [1] Rémi Abgrall, David Amsallem, and Roxana Crisovan. Robust model reduction by l1 -norm minimization and approxima-
          tion via dictionaries: application to nonlinear hyperbolic problems. Advanced Modeling and Simulation in Engineering
          Sciences, 3(1):1–16, 2016.
 [2] David Amsallem, Matthew Zahr, Youngsoo Choi, and Charbel Farhat. Design optimization using hyper-reduced-order
          models. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 51(4):919–940, 2015.
 [3] Harbir Antil, Matthias Heinkenschloss, Ronald HW Hoppe, Christopher Linsenmann, and Achim Wixforth. Reduced
          order modeling based shape optimization of surface acoustic wave driven microfluidic biochips. Mathematics and
          Computers in Simulation, 82(10):1986–2003, 2012.
 [4] Christian Beck, E Weinan, and Arnulf Jentzen. Machine learning approximation algorithms for high-dimensional fully non-
          linear partial differential equations and second-order backward stochastic differential equations. Journal of Nonlinear
          Science, 29(4):1563–1619, 2019.
 [5] Peter Benner, Serkan Gugercin, and Karen Willcox. A survey of projection-based model reduction methods for parametric
          dynamical systems. SIAM review, 57(4):483–531, 2015.
 [6] Jens Berg and Kaj Nyström. A unified deep artificial neural network approach to partial differential equations in complex
          geometries. Neurocomputing, 317:28–41, 2018.
 [7] Gal Berkooz, Philip Holmes, and John L Lumley. The proper orthogonal decomposition in the analysis of turbulent flows.
          Annual review of fluid mechanics, 25(1):539–575, 1993.
 [8] Léon Bottou and Olivier Bousquet. The tradeoffs of large scale learning. In Advances in neural information processing
          systems, pages 161–168, 2008.
 [9] Kevin Carlberg. Adaptive h-refinement for reduced-order models. International Journal for Numerical Methods in
          Engineering, 102(5):1192–1210, 2015.
[10] Kevin Carlberg, Matthew Barone, and Harbir Antil. Galerkin v. least-squares petrov–galerkin projection in nonlinear
          model reduction. Journal of Computational Physics, 330:693–734, 2017.
[11] Kevin Carlberg, Charbel Bou-Mosleh, and Charbel Farhat. Efficient non-linear model reduction via a least-squares
          petrov–galerkin projection and compressive tensor approximations. International Journal for Numerical Methods in
          Engineering, 86(2):155–181, 2011.
[12] Kevin Carlberg, Youngsoo Choi, and Syuzanna Sargsyan. Conservative model reduction for finite-volume models. Journal
          of Computational Physics, 371:280–314, 2018.
[13] Kevin Carlberg, Charbel Farhat, Julien Cortial, and David Amsallem. The gnat method for nonlinear model reduction:
          effective implementation and application to computational fluid dynamics and turbulent flows. Journal of Computa-
          tional Physics, 242:623–647, 2013.
[14] Saifon Chaturantabut and Danny C Sorensen. Nonlinear model reduction via discrete empirical interpolation. SIAM
          Journal on Scientific Computing, 32(5):2737–2764, 2010.
[15] Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary differential equations. In
          Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 6571–6583, 2018.
[16] Youngsoo Choi, Gabriele Boncoraglio, Spenser Anderson, David Amsallem, and Charbel Farhat. Gradient-based con-
          strained optimization using a database of linear reduced-order models. Journal of Computational Physics, page
          109787, 2020.
[17] Youngsoo Choi, Peter Brown, Bill Arrighi, Robert Anderson, and Kevin Huynh. Space–time reduced order model for
          large-scale linear dynamical systems with application to boltzmann transport problems. Journal of Computational
          Physics, P109845, 2020.
[18] Youngsoo Choi and Kevin Carlberg. Space–time least-squares petrov–galerkin projection for nonlinear model reduction.
          SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 41(1):A26–A58, 2019.
[19] Youngsoo Choi, Deshawn Coombs, and Robert Anderson. Sns: a solution-based nonlinear subspace method for time-
          dependent model order reduction. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 42(2):A1116–A1146, 2020.
[20] Youngsoo Choi, Geoffrey Oxberry, Daniel White, and Trenton Kirchdoerfer. Accelerating design optimization using
          reduced order models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11320, 2019.
[21] PG Constantine and G Iaccarino. Reduced order models for parameterized hyperbolic conservations laws with shock
          reconstruction. Center for Turbulence Research Annual Brief, 2012.
[22] George Cybenko. Mathematics of control. Signals and Systems, 2:303, 1989.
[23] Gabriel Dimitriu, Ionel M Navon, and Răzvan Ştefănescu. Application of pod-deim approach for dimension reduction of a
                                                               31
         diffusive predator-prey system with allee effect. In International conference on large-scale scientific computing, pages
         373–381. Springer, 2013.
[24] MWMG Dissanayake and N Phan-Thien. Neural-network-based approximations for solving partial differential equations.
         communications in Numerical Methods in Engineering, 10(3):195–201, 1994.
[25] Zlatko Drmac and Serkan Gugercin. A new selection operator for the discrete empirical interpolation method—improved
         a priori error bound and extensions. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 38(2):A631–A648, 2016.
[26] Zlatko Drmac and Arvind Krishna Saibaba. The discrete empirical interpolation method: Canonical structure and
         formulation in weighted inner product spaces. SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 39(3):1152–1180,
         2018.
[27] Richard Everson and Lawrence Sirovich. Karhunen–loeve procedure for gappy data. JOSA A, 12(8):1657–1664, 1995.
[28] Hongfei Fu, Hong Wang, and Zhu Wang. Pod/deim reduced-order modeling of time-fractional partial differential equations
         with applications in parameter identification. Journal of Scientific Computing, 74(1):220–243, 2018.
[29] Mohamadreza Ghasemi and Eduardo Gildin. Localized model reduction in porous media flow. IFAC-PapersOnLine,
         48(6):242–247, 2015.
[30] Jiequn Han, Arnulf Jentzen, and E Weinan. Solving high-dimensional partial differential equations using deep learning.
         Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(34):8505–8510, 2018.
[31] Juncai He, Lin Li, Jinchao Xu, and Chunyue Zheng. Relu deep neural networks and linear finite elements. arXiv preprint
         arXiv:1807.03973, 2018.
[32] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level perfor-
         mance on imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pages
         1026–1034, 2015.
[33] Michael Hinze and Stefan Volkwein. Proper orthogonal decomposition surrogate models for nonlinear dynamical systems:
         Error estimates and suboptimal control. In Dimension reduction of large-scale systems, pages 261–306. Springer,
         2005.
[34] Harold Hotelling. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components. Journal of educational psy-
         chology, 24(6):417, 1933.
[35] Rui Jiang and Louis J Durlofsky. Implementation and detailed assessment of a gnat reduced-order model for subsurface
         flow simulation. Journal of Computational Physics, 379:192–213, 2019.
[36] Yuehaw Khoo, Jianfeng Lu, and Lexing Ying. Solving parametric pde problems with artificial neural networks. arXiv
         preprint arXiv:1707.03351, 2017.
[37] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, 2014.
[38] Michael Kirby and Dieter Armbruster. Reconstructing phase space from pde simulations. Zeitschrift für angewandte
         Mathematik und Physik ZAMP, 43(6):999–1022, 1992.
[39] Mark A Kramer. Nonlinear principal component analysis using autoassociative neural networks. AIChE journal, 37(2):233–
         243, 1991.
[40] Karl Kunisch and Stefan Volkwein. Galerkin proper orthogonal decomposition methods for a general equation in fluid
         dynamics. SIAM Journal on Numerical analysis, 40(2):492–515, 2002.
[41] Isaac E Lagaris, Aristidis Likas, and Dimitrios I Fotiadis. Artificial neural networks for solving ordinary and partial
         differential equations. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 9(5):987–1000, 1998.
[42] Kookjin Lee and Kevin Carlberg. Deep conservation: A latent dynamics model for exact satisfaction of physical conser-
         vation laws. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09754, 2019.
[43] Kookjin Lee and Kevin T Carlberg. Model reduction of dynamical systems on nonlinear manifolds using deep convolutional
         autoencoders. Journal of Computational Physics, 404:108973, 2020.
[44] Randall J LeVeque. Finite difference methods for ordinary and partial differential equations: steady-state and time-
         dependent problems. SIAM, 2007.
[45] L. Ljung. System Identification: Theory for the User. Prentice Hall information and system sciences series. Prentice Hall
         PTR, 1999.
[46] Michel Loeve. Probability Theory. D. Van Nostrand, New York, 1955.
[47] Zichao Long, Yiping Lu, Xianzhong Ma, and Bin Dong. Pde-net: Learning pdes from data. In International Conference
         on Machine Learning, pages 3208–3216, 2018.
[48] Lu Lu, Pengzhan Jin, and George Em Karniadakis. Deeponet: Learning nonlinear operators for identifying differential
         equations based on the universal approximation theorem of operators. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03193, 2019.
[49] Lu Lu, Xuhui Meng, Zhiping Mao, and George E Karniadakis. Deepxde: A deep learning library for solving differential
         equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.04502, 2019.
[50] Andrew J Meade Jr and Alvaro A Fernandez. The numerical solution of linear ordinary differential equations by feedforward
         neural networks. Mathematical and Computer Modelling, 19(12):1–25, 1994.
[51] M Mordhorst, Timm Strecker, D Wirtz, Thomas Heidlauf, and Oliver Röhrle. Pod-deim reduction of computational emg
         models. Journal of Computational Science, 19:86–96, 2017.
[52] Guofei Pang, Lu Lu, and George Em Karniadakis. fpinns: Fractional physics-informed neural networks. SIAM Journal
         on Scientific Computing, 41(4):A2603–A2626, 2019.
[53] Eric J Parish and Kevin T Carlberg. Windowed least-squares model reduction for dynamical systems. arXiv preprint
         arXiv:1910.11388, 2019.
[54] David B Parker. Learnins logic. Technical Report, 1985.
[55] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin,
         Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In
         Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 8026–8037, 2019.

                                                               32
[56] Benjamin Peherstorfer. Model reduction for transport-dominated problems via online adaptive bases and adaptive sam-
         pling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02094, 2018.
[57] Allan Pinkus. Approximation theory of the mlp model in neural networks. Acta numerica, 8(1):143–195, 1999.
[58] Rajat Raina, Anand Madhavan, and Andrew Y Ng. Large-scale deep unsupervised learning using graphics processors. In
         Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine learning, pages 873–880, 2009.
[59] Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework
         for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations. Journal of Computational
         Physics, 378:686–707, 2019.
[60] Julius Reiss, Philipp Schulze, Jörn Sesterhenn, and Volker Mehrmann. The shifted proper orthogonal decomposition: A
         mode decomposition for multiple transport phenomena. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 40(3):A1322–A1344,
         2018.
[61] Donsub Rim, Scott Moe, and Randall J LeVeque. Transport reversal for model reduction of hyperbolic partial differential
         equations. SIAM/ASA Journal on Uncertainty Quantification, 6(1):118–150, 2018.
[62] Donsub Rim, Benjamin Peherstorfer, and Kyle T Mandli. Manifold approximations via transported subspaces: Model
         reduction for transport-dominated problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.13024, 2019.
[63] Donsub Rim, Luca Venturi, Joan Bruna, and Benjamin Peherstorfer. Depth separation for reduced deep networks in
         nonlinear model reduction: Distilling shock waves in nonlinear hyperbolic problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.13977,
         2020.
[64] David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. Learning representations by back-propagating errors.
         nature, 323(6088):533–536, 1986.
[65] Justin Sirignano and Konstantinos Spiliopoulos. Dgm: A deep learning algorithm for solving partial differential equations.
         Journal of computational physics, 375:1339–1364, 2018.
[66] R Ştefănescu and Ionel Michael Navon. Pod/deim nonlinear model order reduction of an adi implicit shallow water
         equations model. Journal of Computational Physics, 237:95–114, 2013.
[67] Tommaso Taddei and Lei Zhang. Space-time registration-based model reduction of parameterized one-dimensional hyper-
         bolic pdes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06693, 2020.
[68] B Ph van Milligen, V Tribaldos, and JA Jiménez. Neural network differential equation and plasma equilibrium solver.
         Physical review letters, 75(20):3594, 1995.
[69] E Weinan and Bing Yu. The deep ritz method: a deep learning-based numerical algorithm for solving variational problems.
         Communications in Mathematics and Statistics, 6(1):1–12, 2018.
[70] G Welper. Transformed snapshot interpolation with high resolution transforms. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing,
         42(4):A2037–A2061, 2020.
[71] Paul Werbos. Beyond regression:” new tools for prediction and analysis in the behavioral sciences. Ph. D. dissertation,
         Harvard University, 1974.
[72] Dunhui Xiao, Fangxin Fang, Andrew G Buchan, Christopher C Pain, Ionel Michael Navon, Juan Du, and G Hu. Non-
         linear model reduction for the navier–stokes equations using residual deim method. Journal of Computational Physics,
         263:1–18, 2014.
[73] Huanhuan Yang and Alessandro Veneziani. Efficient estimation of cardiac conductivities via pod-deim model order
         reduction. Applied Numerical Mathematics, 115:180–199, 2017.
[74] Yanfang Yang, Mohammadreza Ghasemi, Eduardo Gildin, Yalchin Efendiev, Victor Calo, et al. Fast multiscale reservoir
         simulations with pod-deim model reduction. SPE Journal, 21(06):2–141, 2016.
[75] Dongkun Zhang, Lu Lu, Ling Guo, and George Em Karniadakis. Quantifying total uncertainty in physics-informed neural
         networks for solving forward and inverse stochastic problems. Journal of Computational Physics, 397:108850, 2019.
[76] Pengfei Zhao, Cai Liu, and Xuan Feng. Pod-deim based model order reduction for the spherical shallow water equations
         with turkel-zwas finite difference discretization. Journal of Applied Mathematics, 2014, 2014.
[77] Yinhao Zhu, Nicholas Zabaras, Phaedon-Stelios Koutsourelakis, and Paris Perdikaris. Physics-constrained deep learning for
         high-dimensional surrogate modeling and uncertainty quantification without labeled data. Journal of Computational
         Physics, 394:56–81, 2019.




                                                              33
